How would one actually choose a small personal computer? Where did you hide the can opener? …a private swimming pool. Once it is clear what you are referring to, it is sometimes possible to use just the second word of a two-word compound noun. For example, after mentioning a swimming pool, you can just refer to the pool. Most compound nouns consist of two words, but some consist of three or more words. …a vase of lily of the valley. twowords,onewordorahyphen?1.84 Some compound nouns are written with hyphens instead of spaces between the words. I’m looking forward to a lie-in tomorrow. He’s very good at problem-solving. Judy’s brother-in-law lived with his family. Some compound nouns, especially very frequent ones, are written as one word. …patterned wallpaper. They copied questions from the blackboard. In some cases, you can choose whether to write a compound noun with or without a hyphen, or with or without a space. For example, both air-conditioner and air conditioner are possible, and both postbox and post box are possible. A few compound nouns that consist of more than two words are written partly with hyphens and partly with spaces, for example back-seat driver and bring-and-buy sale. …children from one-parent families. …a Parent-Teacher Association. listsofcompoundnouns1.85 Compound nouns may be countable, uncountable, singular, or plural. Here is a list of some common countable compound nouns: address book air conditioner air raid alarm clock assembly line baby-sitter back-seat driver bank account bird of prey book token blood donor bride-to-be bring-and-buy sale brother-in-law burglar alarm bus stop can opener car park compact disc contact lens credit card dining room drawing pin driving licence estate agent fairytale father-in-law film star fire engine fork-lift truck frying pan guided missile health centre heart attack high school human being letter box lily of the valley mother-in-law musical instrument nervous breakdown news bulletin old hand one-parent family package holiday Parent-Teacher Association parking meter pen-friend personal computer polar bear police station post office rolling pin sister-in-law sleeping bag swimming pool T-shirt tea bag telephone number traveller’s cheque washing machine X-ray youth hostel zebra crossing 1.86 Here is a list of some common uncountable compound nouns: air conditioning air-traffic control barbed wire birth control blood pressure bubble bath capital punishment central heating chewing gum common sense cotton wool data processing do-it-yourself dry-cleaning family planning fancy dress fast food first aid food poisoning further education general knowledge hay fever heart failure higher education hire purchase income tax junk food law and order lost property mail order mineral water nail varnish natural history old age pocket money remote control science fiction show business show jumping sign language social security social work soda water stainless steel table tennis talcum powder toilet paper tracing paper unemployment benefit value added tax washing powder washing-up liquid water-skiing writing paper 1.87 Here is a list of some common singular compound nouns: age of consent arms race brain drain continental divide cost of living death penalty diplomatic corps dress circle fire brigade general public generation gap greenhouse effect hard core human race labour force labour market long jump mother tongue open air private sector public sector rank and file solar system sound barrier space age welfare state women’s movement 1.88 Here is a list of some common plural compound nouns: armed forces baked beans civil rights current affairs French fries grass roots high heels human rights industrial relations inverted commas licensing laws luxury goods modern languages natural resources race relations road works social services social studies swimming trunks vocal cords winter sports yellow pages compositionofcompoundnouns1.89 Most compound nouns consist of two nouns, or an adjective and a noun. I listened with anticipation to the radio news bulletin. …a big dining room. Old age is a time for reflection and slowing down. However, some compound nouns are related to phrasal verbs. These are sometimes written with a hyphen, and sometimes as one word. They are rarely written as separate words. The President was directly involved in the Watergate cover-up. I think there’s been a mix-up. …a breakdown of diplomatic relations. The singer is making a comeback. Here is a list of frequent nouns based on phrasal verbs. They are shown in this list in the form in which they are most frequently written, either with a hyphen or as one word. backup bailout blackout breakaway breakdown break-in breakout break-up build-up buyout check-in checkout check-up comeback countdown cover-up crackdown cutbacks drawback feedback follow-up giveaway handout kick-off lead-up lookout make-up meltdown mix-up passer-by run-in runner-up run-off run-up sell-out setback set-up show-off slowdown takeaway take-off turnover warm-up For more information about phrasal verbs, see paragraphs 3.83 to 3.116. USAGENOTE1.90 In some cases, the meaning of a compound noun is not obvious from the words it consists of. For example, someone’s mother tongue is not the tongue of their mother but the language they learn as a child, and an old hand is not a hand that is old but a person who is experienced at doing a particular job. In other cases, the compound noun consists of words that do not occur on their own, for example hanky-panky, hodge-podge, and argy-bargy. These nouns are usually used in informal conversation rather than formal writing. Most of what he said was a load of hocus-pocus. She is usually involved in some sort of jiggery-pokery. pluralforms1.91 The plural forms of compound nouns vary according to the type of words that they consist of. If the final word of a compound noun is a countable noun, the plural form of the countable noun is used when the compound noun is plural. Air raids were taking place every night. …health centres, banks, post offices, and police stations. Loud voices could be heard through letter boxes. …the refusal of dockers to use fork-lift trucks. For full information about the plural forms of countable nouns, see the Reference section. Compound nouns that are directly related to phrasal verbs usually have a plural form ending in -s. Nobody seems disturbed about cover-ups when they are essential to the conduct of a war. Naturally, I think people who drive smarter, faster cars than mine are show-offs. A few compound nouns are less directly related to phrasal verbs, and consist of a countable noun and an adverb. In these cases, the plural form of the countable noun is used before the adverb when the compound noun is plural. For example, the plural of runner-up is runners-up, and the plural of summing-up is summings-up. Passers-by helped the victim, who was unconscious. Compound nouns that consist of two nouns linked by the prepositions of or in, or a noun followed by to-be, have a plural form in which the first noun in the compound is plural. I like birds of prey and hawks particularly. She was treated with contempt by her sisters-in-law. Most mothers-to-be in their forties opt for this test. Some compound nouns have been borrowed from other languages, mainly French and Latin, and therefore do not have normal English plural forms. Agents provocateurs were sent to cause trouble. The nouveaux riches of younger states are building palatial mansions for themselves. 1.92 Compound nouns are fixed expressions. However, nouns can always be used in front of other nouns in order to refer to something in a more specific way. For the use of nouns as modifiers, see paragraphs 2.169 to 2.174. Talking about people and things without naming them: pronouns 1.93 When you use language, both in speech and writing, you constantly refer to things you have already mentioned or are about to mention. You can do this by repeating the noun phrase, but unless there is a special reason to do so, you are more likely to use a pronoun instead. Pronouns make statements less repetitive. John took the book and opened it. Deborah recognized the knife as hers. Shilton was pleased with himself. This is a very busy place. However, if you have mentioned two or more different things, you usually have to repeat the noun phrase to make it clear which thing you are now talking about. Leaflets and scraps of papers were scattered all over the floor. I started to pick up the leaflets. I could see a lorry and a car. The lorry stopped. members of a group of things or people. Some writers are greater than others. One runner was way ahead of all the others. 1.161 If you want to say something about a member of a group of people or things you can use one. You can then refer to the rest of the group as the others. The bells are carefully installed so that disconnecting one will have no effect on the others. They had three little daughters, one a baby, the others twins of twelve. You use the one and the other to refer to each of a pair of things. The same factors push wages and prices up together, the one reinforcing the other. If you do not wish to specify exactly which of a group you are talking about, you refer to one or other of them. It may be that one or other of them had fears for their health. Definite and indefinite determiners 1.162 In English, there are two main ways in which you can use a noun phrase. You can use it to refer to someone or something, knowing that the person you are speaking to understands which person or thing you are talking about. The man began to run towards the boy. Young people don’t like these operas. Thank you very much for your comments. …a visit to the Houses of Parliament. Alternatively, you can use a noun phrase to refer to someone or something of a particular type, without saying which person or thing you mean. There was a man in the lift. I wish I’d bought an umbrella. Any doctor would say she didn’t know what she was doing. In order to distinguish between these two ways of using a noun phrase, you use a special class of words called determiners. There are two types of determiner, definite determiners and indefinite determiners. You put them at the beginning of a noun phrase. Using the definite determiner the 1.163 The is the most common definite determiner; it is sometimes called the definite article. This, that, these, and those are often called demonstratives or demonstrative adjectives. For more information on these, see paragraphs 1.184 to 1.193. My, your, his, her, its, our and their are possessive determiners. They are also sometimes called possessive adjectives or just possessives. For more information about these, see paragraphs 1.194 to 1.210. Here is the list of definite determiners: the ~ this that these those ~ my your his her its our their Note that in English you cannot use more than one definite determiner before a noun. 1.164 Because the is the most common definite determiner, you can put the in front of any common noun. She dropped the can into the grass. The girls were not in the house. In these examples, the use of the can means that a can has already been mentioned; the grass is definite because it has already been stated that she is outside, and the presence of grass may also have been stated or is presumed; the girls, like the can, must have been mentioned before; and the house means the one where the girls were staying at the time. pronouncingthe1.165 The always has the same spelling, but it has three different pronunciations: /ðə/ when the following word begins with a consonant sound …the dictionary…the first act…the big box. /ði/ when the following word begins with a vowel sound …the exhibition… the effect… the impression. /ðiː/ when it is emphasized You don’t mean the Ernest Hemingway? See paragraph 1.181 for more information about emphatic uses of the. thewithanoun1.166 You can use a noun phrase consisting just of the and a noun when you know that the person you are talking or writing to will understand which person, thing, or group you are referring to. The expedition sailed out into the Pacific. …the most obnoxious boy in the school. He stopped the car in front of the bakery. nounsreferringtoonethingonly1.167 Some nouns are used with the because they refer to only one person, thing, or group. Some of these are specific names or proper nouns, for example titles such as the Pope, unique things such as the Eiffel Tower, and place names such as the Atlantic. …a concert attended by the Queen. We went on camel rides to the Pyramids. See paragraphs 1.52 to 1.58 for more information about proper nouns. Some are singular nouns, that is they refer to something of which there is only one in the world, such as the ground, or the moon. The sun began to turn red. In April and May the wind blows steadily. See paragraphs 1.34 to 1.40 for more information about singular nouns. specificplacesandorganizations1.168 Other nouns are used to talk about just one person, thing, or group in a particular place or organization, so that if you are talking about that place or organization or talking to someone in it, you can use just the and the noun. For example, if there is only one station in a town, the people who live in the town will talk about the station. Similarly, people living in Britain talk to each other about the economy, meaning the British economy, and people working for the same organization might talk about the boss, the union, or the canteen without needing to specify the organization. The church has been broken into. There’s a wind coming off the river. We had to get rid of the director. The mayor is a forty-eight-year-old former labourer. What is the President doing about all this? generalizingaboutpeopleandthings1.169 Normally, if you want to talk generally about all people or things of a particular type, you use the plural form of a noun without a determiner. However, there are some countable nouns that are used in the singular with the to refer to something more general. For example, you can use the theatre or the stage to talk about all entertainment performed in theatres. Similarly, the screen refers to films in general, and the law refers to the system of laws in a country. For him, the stage was just a way of earning a living. He was as handsome in real life as he was on the screen. They do not hesitate to break the law. Some nouns that normally refer to an individual thing or person can be used in the singular with the to refer generally to a system or service in a particular place. For example, you can use the bus to talk about a bus service and the phone to talk about a telephone system. How long does it take on the train? We rang for the ambulance. Nouns referring to musical instruments can be used in the singular with the when you are talking about someone playing, or being able to play, a particular kind of instrument. You play the oboe, I see, said Simon. I was playing the piano when he phoned. usingadjectivesasnouns1.170 When you want to talk generally about groups of people who share the same characteristic or quality, you often choose an adjective preceded by the. This project is all about giving employment to the unemployed. See paragraphs 1.66 to 1.72 for more information about using adjectives as nouns. formalgeneralizations1.171 Nouns referring to plants and animals can be used in the singular with the when you are making a statement about every member of a species. For example, if you say The swift has long, narrow wings, you mean that all swifts have long, narrow wings. The primrose can grow abundantly on chalk banks. Australia is the home of the kangaroo. Similarly, a noun referring to a part of the human body can be used with the to refer to that part of anyone’s body. These arteries supply the heart with blood. …the arteries supplying the kidneys. The is sometimes used with other nouns in the singular to make a statement about all the members of a group. The article focuses on how to protect the therapist rather than on how to cure the patient. These uses are fairly formal. They are not common in ordinary speech. Usually, if you want to make a statement about all the things of a particular kind, you use the plural form of a noun without a determiner. See paragraph 1.227 for more information about this. USAGENOTE1.172 Many common time expressions consist of just the and a noun. We wasted a lot of money in the past. The train leaves Cardiff at four in the afternoon. …the changes which are taking place at the moment. See Chapter 4 for more information about time expressions. referringback1.173 In each of the paragraphs above showing uses of the and a noun, it is possible to understand who or what is being referred to because the noun phrase is commonly accepted as referring to one particular person, thing, or group. However, you can use the with any noun, if it is obvious who or what you are referring to from what has already been said or written. The usual way of referring back to a noun is to use a pronoun, but if the second reference does not come immediately after the first one, or if it is not immediately obvious which noun is being referred to, you should use the, and the noun again. For example, if you have already mentioned that you were in a train, and then continued to tell a story, you can say afterwards The train suddenly stopped. 1.174 You can also use the and a noun when you are referring to someone or something closely connected with something you have just mentioned. For example, you do not usually say We tried to get into the room, but the door of the room was locked. You say We tried to get into the room, but the door was locked, because it is obvious which door you are referring to. She stopped and lit a match. The wind almost blew out the flame. thewithlongernounphrases1.175 Although there are many situations where you use just the and a noun, there are other occasions when you need to add something else to the noun in order to make it clear which person, thing, or group you are referring to. addingadjectives1.176 Sometimes you can show who or what you are referring to by putting an adjective between the and the noun. This is the main bedroom. Somebody ought to have done it long ago, remarked the fat man. Sometimes you need to use more than one adjective. After the crossroads look out for the large white building. For more information about adjectives, see paragraphs 2.2 to 2.168. adjectives:expanding1.177 When you use an adjective between the and a noun, you do not always do it in order to make clear who or what is being referred to. For example, you might want to add further information about someone or something that you have already mentioned. So, if you first refer to someone as a woman in a sentence such as A woman came into the room, you might later want to refer to her as the unfortunate woman or the smiling woman. This is a very common use in written English, especially in stories, but it is not often used in conversation. The astonished waiter was now watching from the other end of the room. The poor woman had witnessed terrible violence. The loss of pressure caused the speeding car to go into a skid. addingclausesorphrasesaddingclausesorphrases1.178 Another way of showing who or what you are referring to is by adding extra information after the and a noun, for example a prepositional phrase, a relative clause, a to-infinitive, an adverb of place or time, or a phrase introduced by a participle. So you might refer to particular people at a party by using noun phrases such as the girl in the yellow dress, the woman who spilled her drink, or the man smoking a cigar. The cars in the driveways were all Ferraris and Porsches. The book that I recommend now costs over twenty pounds. The thing to aim for is an office of your own. Who made the bed in the room upstairs? It depends on the person being interviewed. For more information about this type of extra information that is added to a noun, see paragraphs 2.272 to 2.302. thewithuncountablenouns1.179 You do not normally use the with uncountable nouns because they refer to something in a general way. However, the is necessary if the uncountable noun is followed by extra information such as a clause or a phrase that relates it to a particular person, thing, or group. For example, you cannot say I am interested in education of young children. You have to say I am interested in the education of young children. Babies need the comfort of their mother’s arms. Even the honesty of Inspector Butler was in doubt. I’ve no idea about the geography of Scotland. For more information about uncountable nouns, see paragraphs 1.23 to 1.33. superlatives1.180 The is also used with superlative adjectives. I’m not the best cook in the world. They went to the most expensive restaurant in town. See paragraphs 2.112 to 2.122 for more information about superlative adjectives. emphasizingthe1.181 The is often used in front of a noun to indicate that someone or something is the best of its kind. New Zealand is now the place to visit. You can also use the in front of a person’s name to show that you are referring to the most famous person with that name. You actually met the George Harrison? When you use the in either of these ways, you emphasize it and pronounce it /ðiː/. thewithindefinitedeterminers1.182 The can be used in front of some indefinite determiners, usually to give an indication of amount or quantity. These indefinite determiners are: few little many other …pleasures known only to the few. …a coup under the leadership of the select few. He was one of the few who knew where to find me. We have done the little that is in our power. You use the with other to refer to the second of two things, when you have just mentioned one of them. The men sat at one end of the table and the women at the other. For more information about indefinite determiners, see paragraphs 1.223 to 1.250. thewithnumbers1.183 The is used with one and ones. I’m going to have the green one. The shop was different from the ones I remembered. …a pair of those old glasses, the ones with those funny square lenses. The is also used with other numbers. It is a mistake to confuse the two. Why is she so different from the other two? See paragraphs 2.208 to 2.239 for more information about numbers. Definite determiners: using this, that, these, and those 1.184 You use the definite determiners this, that, these, and those to talk about people or things in a definite way. You use this and these to talk about people and things that are close to you in place or time. When you talk about people or things that are more distant in place or time, you use that and those. You put this and that in front of singular nouns, uncountable nouns, and the singular pronoun one. You put these and those in front of plural nouns and the plural pronoun ones. This, that, these, and those are often called demonstratives or demonstrative adjectives. thisandthese1.185 This and these are used to talk about people or things that are very obvious in the situation that you are in. For example, if you are inside a house, you can refer to it as this house. If you are holding some keys in your hand, you can refer to them as these keys. If you are at a party, you can refer to it as this party. I have lived in this house my entire life. I am going to walk up these steps towards you. I’ll come as soon as these men have finished their work. I like this university. Good evening. In this programme we are going to look at the way in which British music has developed in recent years. When it is clear who or what you are referring to, you can use this and these as pronouns. This use is explained in paragraphs 1.124 to 1.127. 1.186 This and these are also used in many expressions that refer to current periods of time, for example this month, this week, and these days. This use is explained in Chapter 4. thatandthose1.187 You use that and those when you are talking about things or people that you can see but that are not close to you. How much is it for that big box? Can I have one of those brochures? Can you move those books off there? 1.188 When it is clear who or what you are talking about, you can use that and those as pronouns. This use is explained in paragraphs 1.124 to 1.127. Could you just hold that? Please don’t take those. USAGENOTE1.189 You can show that you are referring to the same person or thing you have just mentioned by using this, that, these, or those in front of a noun. For example, if you have just mentioned a girl, you can refer to her as this girl or that girl the second time you mention her. Normally, you use a pronoun to refer to someone or something you have just mentioned, but sometimes you cannot do this because it might not be clear who or what the pronoun refers to. Students and staff suggest books for the library, and normally we’re quite happy to get those books. Their house is in a valley. The people in that valley speak about the people in the next valley as foreigners. They had a lot of diamonds, and they asked her if she could possibly get these diamonds to Britain. The use of this, that, those, etc. to refer again to something that has already been mentioned is fully explained in paragraphs 10.7 to 10.10. 1.190 In informal English, you can also use that and those in front of a noun to talk about people or things that are already known to the person you are speaking or writing to. That idiot Antonio has gone and locked our cabin door. Have they found those missing children yet? Do you remember that funny little apartment? 1.191 You can use that in front of a noun when you are talking about something that has just happened. I knew that meeting would be difficult. That is used as a pronoun to talk about something that has just happened. This use is explained in paragraphs 1.124 to 1.127. usingthoseinsteadofthe1.192 In more formal English, those can be used instead of the in front of a plural noun when the plural noun is followed by a relative clause. In this use, the relative clause specifies exactly which group of people or things are being referred to. …those workers who are employed in large enterprises. The parents are not afraid to be firm about those matters that seem important to them. informaluseofthisandthese1.193 In informal spoken English, people sometimes use this and these in front of nouns even when they are mentioning someone or something for the first time. And then this woman came up to me and she said, I believe you have a goddaughter called Celia Ravenscroft. At school we had to wear these awful white cotton hats. Possessive determiners: my, your, their, etc. 1.194 You often want to show that a thing belongs to someone or that it is connected in some way with someone. One way of doing this is to use a word like my, your, and their, which tells you who something belongs to. These words are called possessive determiners. Are your children bilingual? I remember his name now. They would be welcome to use our library. I’d been waiting a long time to park my car. tableofpossessivedeterminers1.195 There are seven possessive determiners in English, and each one is associated with a particular personal pronoun: singularplural1stpersonmyour2ndpersonyour3rdpersonhisheritstheirPersonal pronouns are explained in paragraphs 1.95 to 1.106. BECAREFUL1.196 You do not spell the possessive its with an apostrophe. It’s is short for it is. position1.197 Possessive determiners, like other determiners, come after any words like all or some of (called predeterminers), and before any numbers or adjectives. …all his letters. …their next message. …my little finger. …our two lifeboats. See paragraph 1.251 for more information about predeterminers. BECAREFUL1.198 In English, you do not use more than one definite determiner before a noun. Therefore, possessive determiners must be used on their own. You cannot say I took off the my shoes. You have to choose whether to say I took off my shoes, or I took off the shoes. agreementwithnoun1.199 You choose which possessive determiner to use according to the identity of the person or thing that owns something. For example, if you want to identify something as belonging to or relating to a particular woman, you always use her. The following noun does not affect the choice. I took off my shoes. Her husband remained standing. He had his hands in his pockets. She had to give up her job. The group held its first meeting last week. The creature lifted its head. …the two dark men, glasses in their hands, waiting silently. …the car companies and their workers. useofown1.200 When you want to draw attention to the fact that something belongs or relates to a particular person or thing, you can use the word own after the possessive determiner. I helped him to some more water but left my own glass untouched. Residents are allowed to bring their own furniture with them if they wish to do so. Make your own decisions. I heard it with my own ears. She felt in charge of her own affairs. If you use a number or adjective in this structure, you put the number or adjective after own. …their own three children. The players provided their own white shorts. usesofpossessivesusesofpossessives1.201 Possessive determiners do not always show that what follows them is actually possessed (or owned) by someone. Sometimes they just show that what follows is connected or associated with someone in some way. They then turned their attention to other things. …the vitality of our music and our culture. In summer, hay fever interfered with all her activities. It’s his brother who has the workshop. 1.202 You can use a possessive determiner in front of a noun that refers to an action, in order to show who or what is doing the action. …not long after our arrival. …his criticism of the Government. …their fight for survival. I’m waiting for your explanation. Most of their claims were worthy. In the last example, their claims refers to the claims that they have made. 1.203 You can also use a possessive determiner to say who or what is affected by an action. My appointment as the first woman chairman symbolizes change. …the redistribution of wealth, rather than its creation. They expressed their horror at her dismissal. In the last example, her dismissal refers to the fact that she was dismissed by someone or by a company. In the first of the following examples, his supporters means the people who support him. …Birch and his supporters. She returned the ring to its owner. USAGENOTE1.204 Sometimes in English the determiner the is used where there is an obvious possessive meaning. In these cases the possession is already made clear by a preceding noun or pronoun. The following paragraphs explain the situations in which you use the rather than a possessive determiner. 1.205 When you refer to a specific part of someone’s body, you normally use a possessive determiner. She has something on her feet and a bag in her hand. Nancy suddenly took my arm. The children wore nothing on their feet. She thanked him shyly and patted his arm. I opened the cupboard and they fell on my head. He shook his head. However, when you are describing an action that someone does to a part of someone else’s body, you often use the definite article (the), especially when the body part is the object of a preposition and when the object of the verb is a pronoun. For example, if you say She hit me on the head, head is the object of the preposition on and me is the object of the verb hit. I patted him on the head. He took her by the arm and began drawing her away. You use the definite article because the owner of the body part has already been identified, and you do not need to repeat this information. Similarly, if the object of the verb is a reflexive pronoun such as myself, yourself, and so on, you use the definite article. This is because the reflexive pronoun already refers to you or to the person who is doing the action, so you do not need to repeat this information by using a possessive determiner. I accidentally hit myself on the head with the brush handle. We can pat ourselves on the back for bringing up our children. Uses of reflexive pronouns are explained in paragraphs 1.111 to 1.118. 1.206 If you want to describe something that you do to yourself or that someone else does to themselves, you normally use a possessive determiner. She was brushing her hair. ‘I’m going to brush my teeth,’ he said. She gritted her teeth and carried on. He walked into the kitchen and shook his head. BECAREFUL1.207 You usually use possessive determiners when you refer to people or animals. You do not usually use them to refer to things that are not alive. It is, for example, more usual to say the door or the door of the room than its door. genericuse1.208 Possessive determiners are sometimes used to talk about things that belong to or are associated with people in general, in a similar way to generic pronouns. For more information on generic pronouns, see paragraphs 1.119 to 1.123. Your can be used when you are talking about something that belongs to or is associated with people in general, or with a person in a situation that you are imagining. Can eating a low-fat diet weaken your hair? Going to the gym is good for your general health. Part of the process involves discussing your decision with a career counsellor. In more formal English, one’s is sometimes used instead of your. A satisfying job can bring structure and meaning to one’s life. Our can be used to talk about all of mankind or society. Being a child is not easy in our society. Their can be used to refer to a person when you do not know, or do not want to specify, whether that person is male or female. The most important asset a person has is their ability to work. Each winner received a plaque with their award title. otherpossessives1.209 There are other ways of showing that something is owned by or connected with someone or something else. For example, you can use ’s (apostrophe s) or a prepositional phrase beginning with of. Mary’s daughter is called Elizabeth. Very often the person appointed has no knowledge of that company’s end product. …the house of a rich banker in Paris. In the opinion of the team, what would they consider to be absolutely necessary? possessivedeterminersusedintitles1.210 Possessive determiners are also sometimes used in titles such as Your Majesty and His Excellency. This use is explained in paragraph 1.56. The possessive form: apostrophe s (’s) 1.211 You usually show that something belongs to or is associated with a specific, named person by adding ’s to the name of the person, and by placing this possessive form in front of the thing that belongs to them, or is associated with them. For example, if John owns a motorbike, you can refer to it as ‘John’s motorbike’. Sylvia put her hand on John’s arm. …the main features of Mr Brown’s economic policy. When you use a noun rather than a name to refer to the person, the noun phrase containing the possessive form also contains a determiner in the usual way. …his grandmother’s house. Your mother’s best handbag. Note that the determiner applies to the possessive form and not to the noun that is being modified by the possessive. spellingandpronunciation1.212 The spelling and pronunciation patterns used to form possessives change according to the spelling and pronunciation of the name or noun. These are explained in the Reference section. otherusesof’s1.213 Note that in addition to being the possessive form, the pattern ’s can also be added to words as a contraction of is or has. This is explained in the Reference section. showingcloseconnection1.214 Apostrophe s (’s) is most often added to a noun referring to a person or an animal. I wore a pair of my sister’s boots. Philip watched his friend’s reaction. Billy patted the dog’s head. It can also be used to show that something belongs to or is associated with a group of people or an institution. She runs the foreign exchange desk for the bank’s corporate clients. They also prepare the university’s budget. …the paper’s political editor, Mr Fred Emery. There was a raid on the Democratic Party’s headquarters. What is your government’s policy? 1.215 Apostrophe s (’s) is sometimes added to a noun referring to an object when specifying a part of it or a quality or feature that it has. I like the car’s design. You can predict a computer’s behaviour because it follows rules. Apostrophe s (’s) is used after nouns and names referring to places to specify something in that place. He is the administrative head of the country’s biggest city. The city’s population is in decline. …Britain’s most famous company. 1.216 If you want to emphasize that something belongs or relates to a particular person and nobody else, you use own. Own can be used after the possessive form of a name or noun, as well as after a possessive determiner. Professor Wilson’s own answer may be unacceptable. We must depend on David’s own assessment. If you are specifying a number of things, you put the number after own. …the Doctor’s own two rooms. otherstructuresotherstructures1.217 When you are talking about two things of the same type that belong to different people you can use the possessive form of a name or noun like a possessive pronoun so that you can avoid repeating the thing itself. In the first example below, her brother’s is used instead of her brother’s appearance. Her appearance is very different to her brother’s. My room is next to Karen’s. It is your responsibility rather than your parents’. The possessive form can also be used on its own to refer to someone’s home or place of work. He’s round at David’s. She stopped off at the butcher’s for a piece of steak. She hasn’t been back to the doctor’s since. Possessive pronouns are explained in paragraphs 1.107 to 1.110. usedinprepositionalphraseswithof1.218 The possessive form can be used in a prepositional phrase beginning with of after a noun phrase. You use this structure when you are talking about one of a number of things that belong to someone or are associated with them, rather than about something unique. Julia, a friend of Jenny’s, was there too. That word was a favourite of your father’s. USAGENOTE1.219 Possessive forms can also be used to refer to things of a particular type that are usually associated with someone. …a woman dressed in a man’s raincoat. …a policeman’s uniform. …women’s magazines. …the men’s lavatory. 1.220 The possessive form can sometimes be used with nouns that refer to an action in order to show who or what is performing the action. …the banking service’s rapid growth. …Madeleine’s arrival at Fairwater House School. Note that phrases beginning with of are used more commonly to do this, and that they are more formal than this use of possessive forms. The use of prepositional phrases beginning with of to show who or what is performing an action is explained in paragraph 2.282. 1.221 Sometimes you can add apostrophe s (’s) to a noun referring to the thing affected by the performer of an action and put it in front of the noun referring to that performer. For example, you can talk about the scheme’s supporters. …Christ’s followers. …the car’s owner. Sometimes an apostrophe s (’s) structure can be used to refer to the thing affected by an action. …Capello’s appointment as England manager. Note again that of structures are more commonly used to do this. otherwaysofshowingpossession1.222 It is also possible to show possession by using either a prepositional phrase beginning with of, or a structure with a noun modifier in it. Prepositional phrases beginning with of are explained in paragraphs 2.277 to 2.283. Noun modifiers are explained in paragraphs 2.169 to 2.174. Indefinite determiners: all, some, many, etc. 1.223 Indefinite determiners are used in noun phrases when you are talking about people or things in a general way, without identifying them. Here is a list of indefinite determiners: a all an another any both each either enough every few little many more most much neither no other several some A, and an are the most common indefinite determiners; they are sometimes called the indefinite article. For more information about a and an, see paragraphs 1.228 to 1.235. For more information about the other indefinite determiners, see paragraphs 1.236 to 1.250. withcountablenouns1.224 A and an are used with singular countable nouns, and show that you are talking about just one person or thing. Another is used with singular countable nouns and other with plural countable nouns, but only after one or more of the same type of person or thing has been mentioned. Any can be used with singular and plural countable nouns to talk about one or more people or things. You use enough, few, many, more, most, several, and some with plural countable nouns to show that you are talking about a number of people or things. Each of these determiners indicates a different set or group within the total number. For more information about their meanings, see the section beginning at paragraph 1.236. All, both, each, either, and every show that you are talking about the total number of people or things involved. Both and either specify that only two people or things are involved. Both is used with a plural noun, and either with a singular noun. All, each, and every usually show that there are more than two. All is used with a plural noun, and each and every with a singular noun. No and neither refer to the total number of things involved in negative statements. No is used with singular or plural nouns, and neither only with singular nouns. No and neither are covered in the section on negative words in Chapter 5. For more information about countable nouns, see paragraphs 1.15 to 1.22. withuncountablenouns1.225 For uncountable nouns, any, enough, little, more, most, much, and some are used to talk about a quantity of something. No and all indicate the total quantity of it. For more information about uncountable nouns, see paragraphs 1.23 to 1.33. BECAREFUL1.226 A, an, another, both, each, either, every, few, many, neither, and several are not usually used with uncountable nouns. usingnounswithoutdeterminers1.227 When you are referring to things or people in an indefinite way, you can sometimes use a noun without a determiner. …raising money from industry, government, and trusts. Permission should be asked before visitors are invited. Uncountable nouns are usually used without a determiner. Health and education are matters that most voters feel strongly about. Wealth, like power, tends to corrupt. Plural nouns are used without a determiner when you are referring to all the people or things of a particular kind. Dogs need a regular balanced diet, not just meat. Are there any jobs that men can do that women can’t? Plural nouns can also be used without a determiner to talk about an unspecified number of things. Teachers should read stories to children. Cats and dogs get fleas. For more information about plural nouns, see paragraphs 1.41 to 1.46. A and an 1.228 A and an are the most common indefinite determiners. They are used for talking about a person or thing when it is not clear or not important which one is intended. You put a or an in front of the singular form of a countable noun. He’s bought the children a puppy. He was eating an apple. An old lady was calling to him. choosingaoran1.229 You use a when the following word begins with a consonant sound. …a piece…a good teacher…a language class. This includes some words that begin with a vowel in their written form, because the first sound is a y sound, /j/. …a university…a European language. You use an when the following word begins with a vowel sound. …an example…an art exhibition…an early train. This includes some words that begin with the letter h in their written form, because the h is not pronounced. …an honest politician…quarter of an hour. A is usually pronounced /ə/. An is usually pronounced /ən/. notbeingspecificaboutwhichpersonorthingyouarereferringtonotbeingspecificaboutwhichpersonorthingyouarereferringto1.230 People often say that you use a or an when you are mentioning something for the first time, but this is not a very helpful rule because there are so many situations where you use the for the first mention of something. See, for example, paragraphs 1.166, 1.167, and 1.168. You usually use a or an when it is not clear or not important which specific person or thing is being referred to. She picked up a book. After weeks of looking, we eventually bought a house. A colleague and I got some money to do research on rats. addingextrainformation1.231 Sometimes, a or an is simply followed by a noun. I got a postcard from Susan. The FBI is conducting an investigation. But if you want to add extra information, you can add an adjective, or a following clause or phrase. I met a Swedish girl on the train from Copenhagen. I’ve been reading an interesting article in The Economist. We had to write a story about our parents’ childhood. I chose a picture that reminded me of my own country. aoranafterlinkingverbs1.232 You can also use a or an after a linking verb. She is a model and an artist. His father was an alcoholic. Noise was considered a nuisance. His brother was a sensitive child. For more information about linking verbs, see Chapter 3. aandanwithuncountablenouns1.233 Sometimes, a or an are used with an uncountable noun, especially one that relates to human emotions or mental activity. This only happens when the uncountable noun is limited by an adjective, or a phrase or clause giving more information. A general education is perhaps more important than an exact knowledge of some particular theory. She had an eagerness for life. usingindividualstogeneralize1.234 You can use a or an with a noun when you are using one individual person or thing to make a general statement about all people or things of that type. For example, if you say A gun must be kept in a safe place, you are talking about an individual gun in order to make a general statement about all guns. A computer can only do what you program it to do. A dog likes to eat far more meat than a human being. An unmarried mother was looked down on. This is not the usual way of referring to groups. Normally, if you want to make a statement about all the people or things of a particular kind, you use the plural form of a noun without a determiner. See paragraph 1.227 for more information about this. nounsreferringtoonethingonly1.235 A and an are sometimes used with singular nouns such as sun, moon, and sky that refer to just one thing. You normally use the with these nouns, but you use a or an when you are drawing attention to some special feature by adding a modifier or a following phrase or clause to the noun. This use is particularly common in literature. We drove under a gloomy sky. A weak sun shines on the promenade. For more information on singular nouns, see paragraphs 1.34 to 1.40. Other indefinite determiners some1.236 Some is usually used to show that there is a quantity of something or a number of things or people, without being precise. It is used with uncountable nouns and plural countable nouns. Some is usually used in affirmative statements. There is some evidence that the system works. There’s some chocolate cake over there. I had some good ideas. Some can be used in questions, when you expect the answer to be yes. Could you give me some examples? Would you like some coffee? Some is also used to mean quite a large amount or number. For example, in I did not meet her again for some years, some means almost the same as several or many. You will be unable to restart the car for some time. It took some years for Dan to realize the truth. 1.237 You can also use some in front of numbers, in slightly more literary English, to show that you are not being totally accurate. I was some fifteen miles by sea from the nearest village. …an animal weighing some five tons. 1.238 When you want to emphasize that you do not know the identity of a person or thing, or you think their identity is not important, you can use some with a singular countable noun, instead of a or an. Most staff members will spend a few weeks in some developing country. Supposing you had some eccentric who came and offered you a thousand pounds. any1.239 Any is used before plural nouns and uncountable nouns when you are referring to a quantity of something that may or may not exist. The patients know their rights like any other consumers. Check online if you’re in any doubt. You can stop at any time you like. Any is also used in questions asking whether something exists or not. It is also used in negative statements to say that something does not exist. Do you have any advice on that? Do you have any vacancies for bar staff? It hasn’t made any difference. Nobody in her house knows any English. I rang up to see if there were any tickets left. Questions and negative statements are explained further in Chapter 5. Note that you can use any with singular countable nouns to talk about someone or something of a particular type, when you do not want to mention a specific person or thing. Any big tin container will do. Cars can be rented at almost any US airport. Any can also be used as a pronoun. See paragraphs 1.93 to 1.161 for more information about pronouns. It is also used in if-clauses. For more information about these, see Chapter 8. anotherandother1.240 Another is used with singular countable nouns to talk about an additional person or thing of the same type as you have already mentioned. Could I have another cup of coffee? He opened another shop last month. It can also be used before numbers to talk about more than one additional thing. Margaret staying with us for another ten days. Five officials were sacked and another four arrested. Other is used with plural nouns, or occasionally with uncountable nouns. Other people must have thought like this. They are either asleep or entirely absorbed in play or other activity. selectingfromagroup1.241 Enough is used to say that there is as much of something as is needed, or as many things as are needed. You can therefore use enough in front of uncountable nouns or plural nouns. There’s enough space for the children to run around. They weren’t getting enough customers. Many indicates that there is a large number of things, without being very precise. You use many with a plural countable noun. He spoke many different languages. When you want to emphasize that there is only a small number of things of a particular kind, you use few with a plural countable noun. There are few drugs that act quickly enough to be effective. There were few doctors available. Few is quite formal. In less formal English, you can use not many with the same meaning. There aren’t many gardeners like him. Most indicates nearly all of a group or amount. You use most with an uncountable noun or a plural countable noun. Most people recover but the disease can be fatal. Most farmers are still using the old methods. Several usually indicates an imprecise number that is not very large, but is more than two. You use several with a plural countable noun. Several projects had to be postponed. I had seen her several times before. There were several reasons for this. all,both,andeither1.242 All includes every person or thing of a particular kind. You use all with an uncountable noun or a plural countable noun. They believe that all prisoners should be treated the same. Both is used to say something about two people or things of the same kind. You use both with a plural countable noun. The two people or things have usually been mentioned or are obvious from the context. Both is sometimes used to emphasize that two people or things are involved, rather than just one. There were excellent performances from both actresses. Denis held his cocoa in both hands. Either is also used to talk about two things, but usually indicates that only one of the two is involved. You use either with a singular countable noun. When it is part of the subject of a clause, the verb is in the singular. No argument could move either old gentleman from this decision. If either parent has the disease, there is a much higher chance that the child will develop it. Note that either can mean both of two things, especially when it is used with end and side. They stood on either side of the bed. eachandevery1.243 You use each and every when you are talking about all the members of a group of people or things. You use each when you are thinking about the members as individuals, and every when you are making a general statement about all of them. Each and every are followed by a singular countable noun. Each seat was covered with a white lace cover. They would rush out to meet each visitor. This new wealth can be seen in every village. Every child would have milk every day. Each applicant has five choices. I agree with every word Peter says. You can modify every but not each. You can say things such as Almost every chair is broken or Not every chair is broken but you cannot say Almost each chair is broken or Not each chair is broken. This is because each is slightly more precise and definite than every. Note that each can be used when talking about two people or things, but every is only used for numbers larger than two. littleandmuch1.244 If you want to emphasize that there is only a small amount of something, you use little. You use much to emphasize a large amount. Little and much are used with uncountable nouns. Little is used only in affirmative statements. It is not used in questions or negatives. There was little applause. We’ve made little progress. We have very little information. Little is quite formal. In less formal texts, not much is more common. For example, instead of saying We’ve made little progress, you can say We haven’t made much progress. Much is usually used in questions and negatives. Do you watch much television? He did not speak much English. Very much is used only in negative statements. For example, I don’t have very much sugar means I have only a small quantity of sugar. I haven’t given very much attention to this problem. Much is used in affirmative statements when it is modified by an adverb such as too, so or as. It would take too much time. Provide as much information as you can about the property. In more formal English, much can be used in affirmative statements without an adverb. This usage is most common with abstract nouns, particularly those relating to discussion, debate and research. The subject of company annual accounts is generating much debate among accountants and analysts. The team’s findings have caused much excitement among medical experts. After much speculation, intelligence agencies now believe that he survived. Usually, though, much is not used in affirmative statements. Instead, people generally use a lot of and, in less formal texts, lots of. For example, people would not usually say I have much work to do; instead, they would say I have a lot of work to do. For more information on a lot of, see 2.176. certain,numerous,andvarious1.245 Some other words can be indefinite determiners, such as certain, numerous, and various. You use certain, numerous and various with a plural countable noun. Certain is used to refer to some members of a group, without specifying which ones. We have certain ideas about what topics are suitable. Numerous, like many, indicates a large number in an imprecise way. I have received numerous requests for information. Various is used to emphasize that you are referring to several different things or people. We looked at schools in various European countries. more,few,andless1.246 There are three comparatives that are determiners. More is used in front of plural and uncountable nouns, usually with than, to refer to a quantity or amount of something that is greater than another quantity or amount. He does more hours than I do. His visit might do more harm than good. But more is also often used to refer to an additional quantity of something rather than in comparisons. More teachers need to be recruited. We need more information. Less is used to refer to an amount of something that is smaller than another amount. Fewer is used to refer to a group of things that is smaller than another group. Less is usually used before uncountable nouns and fewer before plural nouns, but in informal English less is also used before plural nouns. The poor have less access to education. …machinery which uses less energy. As a result, he found less time than he would have hoped for his hobbies. There are fewer trees here. For more information about comparison, see paragraphs 2.103 to 2.139. otherexpressions1.247 Some other expressions also behave like indefinite determiners: a few, a little, a good many, a great many. These have a slightly different meaning from the single word determiners few, little, and many. If you are mentioning a small number of things, but without any emphasis, you can use a few with plural countable nouns. They went to San Diego for a few days. A few years ago we set up a factory. I usually do a few jobs for him in the house. Similarly, if you are just mentioning a small amount of something without any emphasis, you can use a little with uncountable nouns. He spread a little honey on a slice of bread. I have to spend a little time in Oxford. Charles is having a little trouble. However, a good many and a great many are more emphatic forms of many. I haven’t seen her for a good many years. He wrote a great many novels. modifyingdeterminers:fourmorerooms,toomuchtime1.248 Some indefinite determiners can be modified by very, too, and far, or sometimes by another indefinite determiner. You can modify more with numbers or with other indefinite determiners. Downstairs there are four more rooms. There had been no more accidents. You will never have to do any more work. You can use too many or too much to say that a quantity is more than is wanted or needed, and too few or too little if it is not enough. There were too many competitors. They gave too much power to the Treasury. There’s too little literature involved. You can use very before few, little, many, and much. You can also say a very little or a very great many. Very many women have made their mark on industry. Very few cars had reversing lights. I had very little money left. usingone1.249 You use one as a determiner when you have been talking or writing about a group of people or things and you want to say something about a particular member of the group. One is used instead of a or an and is slightly more emphatic. We had one case that dragged on for a couple of years. They criticise me all the time, wrote one woman. I know one household where that happened, actually. The use of one as a number is explained in paragraphs 2.214 to 2.215. 1.250 Many determiners are also pronouns; that is, they can be used without a following noun. For more information about these, see paragraphs 1.154 to 1.161. predeterminers:allthepeople,quitealongtime1.251 Normally, a determiner is the first word in a noun phrase. However, there is a class of words called predeterminers which can come in front of a determiner. Here is a list of predeterminers: all both double half many quarter twice ~ quite rather such what The first group are used to talk about amounts or quantities. All can also be used to refer to every part of something. When used with this meaning it is used with an uncountable noun. All the boys started to giggle. He will give you all the information. All these people knew each other. I shall miss all my friends. I invited both the boys. Both these parties shared one basic belief. She paid double the sum they asked for. I’m getting twice the pay I used to get. In the second group, quite and rather can be used either to emphasize or to reduce the effect of what is being said. In speech, the meaning is made clear by your tone of voice. In writing, it is sometimes difficult to know which meaning is intended without reading more of the text. It takes quite a long time to get a divorce. It was quite a shock. Seaford is rather a pleasant town. It was rather a disaster. Such and what are used for emphasis. He has such a beautiful voice. What a mess! 2 Giving information about people and things: adjectives, numbers, and other modifiers Introduction 2.1 In the previous chapter the use of nouns, pronouns, and determiners to name and identify people and things was explained. This chapter explains ways of giving more information about the people and things that have already been named or identified. One way of giving more information within a noun phrase about people or things is by the use of an adjective, such as small, political, or blue. Adjectives can be used as modifiers of a noun or after linking verbs. They are explained in paragraphs 2.2 to 2.168. Sometimes, nouns, rather than adjectives, are used to modify the noun. This is explained in paragraphs 2.169 to 2.174. There are other groups of words that are used before a noun phrase to give more information about people and things. They are linked to the noun phrase by of. These include certain indefinite determiners such as many of and some of (explained in paragraphs 2.176 to 2.193), and other expressions that are used for describing a part or amount of something, such as a piece of and a bottle of (explained in paragraphs 2.194 to 2.207). Numbers and fractions are also used to indicate the amount of people or things you are talking about. Numbers are explained in paragraphs 2.208 to 2.239 and fractions are explained in paragraphs 2.240 to 2.249. The other way of giving more information within a noun phrase about people or things is by using a qualifier, that is, giving extra information in the form of a phrase or a clause after the noun to expand its meaning. This is explained in paragraphs 2.272 to 2.302. Describing people and things: adjectives 2.2 When you want to give more information about something than you can give by using a noun alone, you can use an adjective to identify it or describe it in more detail. …a new idea. …new ideas. …new creative ideas. Ideas are important. …to suggest that new ideas are useful. mainpointsaboutadjectives2.3 The most important things to notice about an adjective in English are what structure it is in (e.g. before a noun or after a linking verb) what type of adjective it is (e.g. describing a quality or placing the noun in a particular class). BECAREFUL2.4 The form of an adjective does not change: you use the same form for singular and plural and for subject and object. We were looking for a good place to camp. The next good place was forty-five miles further on. Good places to fish were hard to find. We found hardly any good places. structure2.5 Adjectives are nearly always used in connection with a noun or pronoun to give information about the person, thing, or group that is being referred to. When this information is not the main purpose of a statement, adjectives are placed in front of a noun, as in hot coffee. The use of adjectives in a noun phrase is explained in paragraph 2.19. 2.6 Sometimes, however, the main purpose of a statement is to give the information expressed by an adjective. When this happens, adjectives are placed after a linking verb such as be or become, as in I am cold and He became ill. The use of adjectives after a linking verb is explained in paragraphs 3.122 to 3.137. typesofadjective2.7 There is a large group of adjectives that identify qualities that someone or something has. This group includes words such as happy and intelligent. These are called qualitative adjectives. Qualitative adjectives are explained in paragraphs 2.22 to 2.25. 2.8 There is another large group of adjectives that identify someone or something as a member of a class. This group includes words such as financial and intellectual. These are called classifying adjectives. Classifying adjectives are explained in paragraphs 2.26 to 2.28. Some adjectives are both qualitative and classifying. These are explained in paragraph 2.29. 2.9 There is a small group of adjectives that identify the colour of something. This group includes words like blue and green. They are called colour adjectives. Colour adjectives are explained in paragraphs 2.30 to 2.35. 2.10 Another small group of adjectives are used to emphasize your feelings about the person or thing you are talking about. These adjectives are called emphasizing adjectives, and they include adjectives such as complete, absolute, and utter. Emphasizing adjectives are explained in paragraphs 2.36 to 2.39. 2.11 There is a small group of adjectives that are used in a very similar way to determiners (see paragraphs 1.162 to 1.251) to make the reference more precise. These are called postdeterminers because their place in a noun phrase is immediately after the determiner, if there is one, and before any other adjectives. Postdeterminers are explained in paragraph 2.40. structuralrestrictionsstructuralrestrictions2.12 Most adjectives can be used either before the noun or after a linking verb. However, there are some that can be used only in one position or the other. This is explained in paragraphs 2.41 to 2.53. 2.13 There are a few adjectives that can be used immediately after the noun. They are explained in paragraphs 2.58 to 2.62. orderofadjectives2.14 When two or more adjectives are used in a structure, they usually occur in a particular order. This is explained in paragraphs 2.54 to 2.57. -ingand-edadjectives2.15 There are a large number of English adjectives ending in -ing, many of which are related to the -ing participle of a verb. In this grammar they are called -ing adjectives. There are also a large number of English adjectives ending in -ed, many of which are related to the -ed participle of a verb. In this grammar they are called -ed adjectives. -ing adjectives are explained in paragraphs 2.63 to 2.76. -ed adjectives are explained in paragraphs 2.77 to 2.93. compoundadjectives2.16 Compound adjectives are made up of two or more words, usually written with hyphens between them. Compound adjectives are explained in paragraphs 2.94 to 2.102. comparingthings2.17 When you want to compare the amount of a quality that two or more people or things have, you can use comparative and superlative adjectives. There are also some other ways of comparing things. Comparatives are explained in paragraphs 2.103 to 2.111, and superlatives are explained in paragraphs 2.112 to 2.122. Other ways of comparing things are explained in paragraphs 2.123 to 2.139. talkingabouttheamountofaquality2.18 You can also talk about the amount of a quality that something or someone has by using an adverb like totally or mildly with an adjective. This is explained in paragraphs 2.141 to 2.168. Adjective structures 2.19 Adjectives are used in two main structures. One of them involves adjectives coming before the noun phrase. If you say Julia was carrying an old suitcase, your main purpose is to say that Julia was carrying a suitcase. The adjective old gives more information about what kind of suitcase it was. He was wearing a white t-shirt. …a technical term. …a pretty little star-shaped flower bed. Most adjectives can be used in this way. 2.20 The other main structure involves adjectives being used after linking verbs such as be and become. Putting an adjective after a linking verb has the effect of focusing attention on the adjective. If you say The suitcase she was carrying was old, your main purpose is to describe the suitcase, so the focus is on the adjective old. The roads are busy. The house was quiet. He became angry. I feel cold. Nobody seemed amused. The use of adjectives after linking verbs is explained in paragraphs 3.132 to 3.137. Most adjectives can be used in this way. 2.21 In the following examples, the first example in each pair shows an adjective being used before the noun, while the second example shows it being used with a linking verb. There was no clear evidence. ‘That’s very clear,’ I said. It had been a pleasant evening. It’s not a big stream, but it’s very pleasant. She bought a loaf of white bread. The walls were white. Identifying qualities: a sad story, a pretty girl 2.22 There are two main types of adjective, qualitative and classifying. Adjectives that describe a quality that someone or something has, such as sad, pretty, small, happy, healthy, wealthy, and wise, are called qualitative adjectives. …a sad story. …a pretty girl. …a small child. …a happy mother with a healthy baby. …wealthy bankers. I think it would be wise to give up. gradability:verysad,ratherfunny2.23 Adjectives that describe qualities are gradable, which means that the person or thing referred to can have more or less of the quality mentioned. 2.24 The usual way in which you show the amount of a quality that something or someone has is by using adverbs like very and rather in front of qualitative adjectives. This is explained in paragraphs 2.140 to 2.156. 2.25 The other way in which you can talk about the amount of a quality that something or someone has is by using a comparative, such as bigger and more interesting, or a superlative, such as the biggest and the most interesting. Comparatives and superlatives are explained in paragraphs 2.103 to 2.122. Here is a list of qualitative adjectives: active angry anxious appropriate attractive bad beautiful big brief bright broad busy calm careful cheap clean clear close cold comfortable common complex cool curious dangerous dark dear deep determined different difficult dirty dry easy effective efficient expensive fair familiar famous fast fat fine firm flat frank free fresh friendly frightened funny good great happy hard heavy high hot important interesting kind large late light likely long loose loud lovely low lucky narrow nervous new nice obvious odd old pale patient plain pleasant poor popular powerful pretty proud quick quiet rare reasonable rich rough sad safe sensible serious sharp shocked short sick significant silly simple slow small soft special steady strange strong stupid successful suitable sure surprised sweet tall terrible thick thin tight tiny tired typical understanding useful violent warm weak wet wide wild worried young Identifying type: financial help, abdominal pains 2.26 The other main type of adjective consists of adjectives that you use to identify the type or class that something belongs to. For example, if you say financial help, you are using the adjective financial to describe what type of help you are talking about (that is, to classify help). Adjectives that are used in this way are called classifying adjectives. …financial help. …abdominal pains. …a medieval manuscript. …my daily shower. …an equal partnership. …a sufficient amount of milk. Note that noun modifiers (see paragraphs 2.169 to 2.174) are used in a similar way to classifying adjectives. For example, financial matters and money matters are similar in both structure and meaning. Here is a list of classifying adjectives: absolute active actual agricultural alternative annual apparent available basic central chemical civil commercial communist conservative cultural daily democratic direct domestic double due east eastern economic educational electric empty external female financial foreign free full general golden historical human ideal independent industrial inevitable intellectual internal international legal local magic male medical mental military modern moral national natural negative north northern nuclear official open original personal physical political positive possible potential private professional proper psychological public raw ready real religious revolutionary right royal rural scientific separate sexual single social solid south southern standard straight sufficient theoretical traditional urban west western wooden wrong 2.27 Adjectives such as British, American, and Australian, that indicate nationality or origin, are also classifying adjectives. They start with a capital letter because they are related to names of countries. …American citizens. Some classifying adjectives are formed from people’s names, for example Victorian and Shakespearean. They also start with a capital letter. …Victorian houses. 2.28 Because they put something in a class, classifying adjectives are not gradable in the way that qualitative adjectives are. For example, if you do not have to pay for something, you cannot say that it is very free, or rather free. Things are either in a particular class or not in it. Therefore, classifying adjectives do not have comparatives and superlatives and are not normally used with adverbs like very and rather. However, when you want to show that you feel strongly about what you are saying, you can use an intensifying adverb such as absolutely with a classifying adjective. This is explained in paragraphs 2.147 to 2.148. adjectivesthatareofbothtypes2.29 Some adjectives can be either qualitative or classifying depending on the meaning. For example, in an emotional person, emotional is a qualitative adjective meaning feeling or expressing strong emotions; it has a comparative and superlative and it can be used with words like very and rather. Thus, a person can be very emotional, rather emotional, or more emotional than someone else. However, in the emotional needs of children, emotional is a classifying adjective meaning relating to a person’s emotions, and so it cannot be used with words like very or rather, and it does not have a comparative and superlative. Here is a list of adjectives that are often used both as qualitative adjectives and as classifying adjectives: academic conscious dry educational effective emotional extreme late modern moral objective ordinary regular religious revolutionary rural scientific secret similar social Identifying colours: colour adjectives 2.30 When you want to say what colour something is, you use a colour adjective. …her blue eyes. …a red ribbon. Here is a list of the main colour adjectives: black blue brown cream green grey orange pink purple red scarlet violet white yellow addingextrainformationtocolouradjectives2.31 If you want to specify a colour more precisely, you use a word such as light, pale, dark, deep, or bright, in front of a colour adjective. …light brown hair. …a pale green suit. …a dark blue dress. …deep red dye. …her bright blue eyes. These combinations sometimes have hyphens. …a light-blue suit. …the plant’s tiny pale-pink flowers. Note that these words cannot be used with the colours black or white, because you cannot have different shades of black and white. approximatecolours2.32 If you want to talk about a colour that does not have a definite name you can: use a colour adjective with -ish added to the end …greenish glass. …yellowish hair. combine two colour adjectives, often with -ish or -y on the end of the first one …greenish-white flowers. …a greeny blue line. …the blue-green waves. BECREATIVE2.33 You can mix colours in these ways to produce whatever new colour you are trying to describe. comparisonofcolouradjectives2.34 Colour adjectives such as blue and green occasionally have comparatives and superlatives ending in -er and -est. His face was redder than usual. …the bluest sky I have ever seen. Comparatives and superlatives are explained in paragraphs 2.103 to 2.122. colournouns2.35 Colours can also be nouns, and the main colours can also be plural nouns. The snow shadows had turned to a deep blue. They blended in so well with the khaki and reds of the landscape. …brilliantly coloured in reds, yellows, blacks, and purples. Showing strong feelings: complete, absolute, etc. 2.36 You can emphasize your feelings about something that you mention by putting an adjective such as complete, absolute, or utter in front of a noun. He made me feel like a complete idiot. Some of it was absolute rubbish. …utter despair. …pure bliss. You generally use an adjective of this kind only when the noun shows your opinion about something. Because they are used to show strong feelings, these adjectives are called emphasizing adjectives. Here is a list of emphasizing adjectives: absolute complete entire outright perfect positive pure real total true utter adjectivesforshowingdisapproval2.37 A small group of adjectives ending in -ing are used in very informal spoken English for emphasis, usually to show disapproval or contempt. Everybody in the whole stinking town was loaded with money. Shut that blinking door! Here is a list of adjectives used informally for emphasis: blinking blithering blooming blundering crashing flaming freezing piddling raving scalding stinking thumping thundering whopping BECAREFUL2.38 Many of these adjectives are usually used with one particular noun or adjective after them: blithering idiot, blundering idiot, crashing bore, raving lunatic, thundering nuisance, freezing cold, scalding hot, piddling little …, thumping great …, whopping great …. He’s driving that car like a raving lunatic! I’ve got a stinking cold. …a piddling little car. veryasanemphasizingadjective2.39 The word very is sometimes used to emphasize a noun, in expressions like the very top and the very end. …at the very end of the shop. …the very bottom of the hill. These molecules were formed at the very beginning of history. Making the reference more precise: postdeterminers 2.40 There is a small group of adjectives that are used in a very similar way to determiners (see paragraphs 1.162 to 1.251) to make the reference more precise. These are called postdeterminers, because their place in a noun phrase is immediately after the determiner, if there is one, and before any other adjectives. …the following brief description. …certain basic human qualities. …improvements in the last few years. …further technological advance. He wore his usual old white coat…. …the only sensible thing to do. You often need to make it clear precisely what you are referring to. For example, if you say Turn left at the tall building someone might ask which tall building you mean. If you say Turn left at the next tall building, there can be no doubt which one you mean. The postdeterminer next picks it out precisely. Here is a list of adjectives that are postdeterminers: additional certain chief entire existing first following further last main next only opposite other particular past present previous principal remaining same special specific usual Some of these adjectives are also ordinary classifying adjectives. He had children from a previous marriage. There are two main reasons for this. Here is a list of postdeterminers that are also classifying adjectives: additional chief existing further main other particular past previous principal remaining specific Adjectives that are used to show the position of something are also used for precise reference. …the middle button of her black leather coat. …the top 100 German companies. Here is a list of adjectives sometimes used to talk about the position of something as well as for precise reference: left right upper lower top bottom middle end front back Postdeterminers can also be used with numbers. This is explained in paragraph 2.219. Special classes of adjectives 2.41 Most adjectives can be used both before the noun and after a linking verb, but there are some that are only used in one position or the other. There are a few adjectives that are always or almost always used in front of a noun and are never or rarely used after a linking verb. These adjectives are called attributive adjectives. Examples are atomic and outdoor. You can talk about an atomic explosion, but you do not say The explosion was atomic. You can talk about outdoor pursuits, but you do not say Their pursuits are outdoor. adjectivesthatareonlyusedinfrontofanoun2.42 A few qualitative adjectives (see paragraphs 2.22 to 2.25) are only used in front of a noun. Here is a list of qualitative adjectives always used in this way: adoring belated chequered choked commanding fateful flagrant fleeting knotty paltry punishing ramshackle scant searing thankless unenviable Most adjectives that are only used in front of a noun are classifying adjectives (see paragraphs 2.26 to 2.28). Here is a list of classifying adjectives used attributively: atomic bridal cardiac countless cubic digital east eastern eventual existing federal forensic indoor institutional introductory investigative judicial lone maximum nationwide neighbouring north northern occasional orchestral outdoor phonetic preconceived remedial reproductive smokeless south southern subterranean supplementary underlying west western woollen 2.43 There are no colour adjectives (see paragraphs 2.30 to 2.35) that are restricted to this position. Emphasizing adjectives (see paragraphs 2.36 to 2.39) are usually used in front of a noun. adjectivesthatalwaysfollowalinkingverb2.44 Some adjectives are normally used only after a linking verb and not in front of a noun. These adjectives are called predicative adjectives. For example, you can say She felt glad, but you do not normally talk about a glad woman. Here is a list of adjectives usually used in this way: afraid alive alone apart asleep awake aware content due glad ill likely ready safe sorry sure unable unlikely well Note that they do not have to be followed by a prepositional phrase. 2.45 Some adjectives are usually followed by a prepositional phrase because their meaning would otherwise be unclear or incomplete. For example, you cannot simply say that someone is accustomed. You have to say that they are accustomed to something. The following usage note explains which prepositions you use after a particular adjective. USAGENOTE2.46 There are a few adjectives that are followed by the preposition to when they are used after a linking verb. She’s allergic to cats. Older people are particularly susceptible to heart problems. Here is a list of adjectives that are usually or always used after a linking verb and are followed by to: accustomed adjacent allergic attributable attuned averse close conducive devoted impervious injurious integral prone proportional proportionate reconciled related resigned resistant similar subject subservient susceptible unaccustomed 2.47 There are a few adjectives that are followed by the preposition of when they are used after a linking verb. He was aware of the danger that faced him. They seemed capable of winning their first game of the season. He was devoid of any talent whatsoever. His mind seemed to have become incapable of any thought. Here is a list of adjectives that are usually or always used after a linking verb and are followed by of: aware bereft capable characteristic desirous devoid fond full heedless illustrative incapable indicative mindful reminiscent representative compatible consonant conversant filled fraught riddled tinged 2.48 There are a few adjectives that are followed by the preposition with when they are used after a linking verb. His surprise became tinged with disbelief. The plastic has to be compatible with the body tissues that make contact with it. This way of life is fraught with danger. Here is a list of adjectives that are usually or always used after a linking verb and are followed by with: 2.49 Some adjectives are followed by other prepositions when they are used after a linking verb. These ideas are rooted in self-deception. Didn’t you say the raid was contingent on the weather? Darwin concluded that people were descended from apes. Here is a list of adjectives that are usually or always used after a linking verb and are followed by the preposition indicated: contingent on descended from inherent in lacking in rooted in steeped in swathed in unhampered by In some cases, there is a choice between two prepositions. Many of their courses are connected with industry. Such names were arbitrarily given and were not connected to any particular event. Here is a list of adjectives that are usually or always used after a linking verb and that are followed by the prepositions shown: answerable for answerable to burdened by burdened with connected to connected with dependent on dependent upon immune from immune to inclined to inclined towards incumbent on incumbent upon insensible of insensible to intent on intent upon parallel to parallel with reliant on reliant upon stricken by stricken with 2.50 Different is most commonly followed by from. It is also sometimes followed by to in British English or than in American English. Students today are different from the students ten years ago. adjectivesfollowedbyto-infinitiveclauses2.51 To complete the meaning of some adjectives that are used predicatively, you need to follow with a clause beginning with a to-infinitive. For example, you cannot just say He is unable. You have to add a clause beginning with to-infinitive such as to do: He is unable to do it. To-infinitive clauses are explained in the Reference section. They were unable to help her. I am willing to try. She is bound to notice there’s something wrong. I’m inclined to agree with the minister. Here is a list of adjectives that are always or nearly always followed by a to-infinitive clause: able bound destined doomed due fated fit inclined liable likely loath prepared unable unwilling willing 2.52 You can also use a clause beginning with a to-infinitive after many other adjectives to give more information about something. I was afraid to go home. I was happy to see them again. He was powerless to prevent it. I was almost ashamed to tell her. The path was easy to follow. Note that the subject of the main clause is also the subject of the to-infinitive clause. adjectivesfollowedbythat-clauses2.53 When adjectives that refer to someone’s beliefs or feelings are used after a linking verb, they are often followed by a that-clause (see paragraphs 8.119 to 8.121). The subject of the that-clause is not always the same as the subject of the main clause, so you need to specify it. She was sure that he meant it. He was frightened that something terrible might be said. I’m aware that I reached a rather large audience through the book. Note that the word that is not always used in a that-clause. They were sure she had been born in the city. Here is a list of common adjectives often followed by a that-clause: afraid angry anxious aware certain confident frightened glad happy pleased proud sad sorry sure surprised unaware upset worried Note that all of these adjectives except angry, aware, unaware, upset, and worried can also be followed by a to-infinitive. I was afraid that she might not be able to bear the strain. Don’t be afraid to ask questions. She was surprised that I knew about it. The twins were very surprised to see Ralph. Position of adjectives in noun phrases 2.54 When you use more than one adjective in a noun phrase, the usual order for the adjectives is: qualitative adjectives, followed by colour adjectives, followed by classifying adjectives. …a little white wooden house. …pretty black lacy dresses. …a large circular pool of water. …a beautiful pink suit. …rapid technological advance. …a nice red apple. …the black triangular fin. This order is nearly always followed in English. Occasionally however, when you want to focus on a particular characteristic of the person or thing you are describing, you can vary this order, especially when one of the adjectives refers to colour or size. …a square black hole. Note that you sometimes put a comma or and between adjectives. This is explained in paragraphs 8.180 to 8.186 and paragraph 8.201. …the long, low caravan. It was a long and tedious business. 2.55 Comparatives (see paragraphs 2.103 to 2.111) and superlatives (see paragraphs 2.112 to 2.122) normally come in front of all other adjectives in a noun phrase. …better parental control. …the highest monthly figures on record. positionofnounmodifiersandadjectives2.56 When a noun phrase contains both an adjective and a noun modifier (see paragraphs 2.169 to 2.174) the adjective is placed in front of the noun modifier. …the booming European car industry. …the world’s biggest and most prestigious book fair. twoormoreadjectivesafteralinkingverb2.57 When you use two adjectives after a linking verb, you use a conjunction, usually and, to link them. If you use more than two adjectives, you usually put a conjunction such as and between the last two adjectives and commas between the others. This is fully explained in paragraphs 8.180 to 8.186 and paragraph 8.201. The room was large and square. We felt hot, tired, and thirsty. Note that you put the adjectives in the order that you think is the most important. adjectivesafternouns2.58 There are a few adjectives that are usually or always used after a noun. Here is a list showing the different groups of adjectives used after a noun: designate elect galore incarnate manqué ~ broad deep high long old tall thick wide ~ concerned involved present proper responsible ~ affected available required suggested USAGENOTE2.59 The adjectives designate, elect, galore, incarnate, and manqué are only used immediately after a noun. She was now president elect. There are empty houses galore. 2.60 The adjectives broad, deep, high, long, old, tall, thick, and wide are used immediately after measurement nouns when giving the size, duration, or age of a thing or person. This use is fully explained in paragraph 2.253. …six feet tall. …three metres wide. …twenty five years old. 2.61 The adjectives concerned, involved, present, responsible, and proper have different meanings depending on whether you put them in front of a noun or immediately after one. For example, the concerned mother describes a mother who is anxious, but the mother concerned simply refers to a mother who has just been mentioned. …the approval of interested and concerned parents. The idea needs to come from the individuals concerned. All this became a very involved process. He knew all of the people involved. …the present international situation. Of the 18 people present, I know only one. …parents trying to act in a responsible manner. …the person responsible for his death. …a proper training in how to teach. …the first round proper of the FA Cup. 2.62 The adjectives affected, available, required, and suggested can be used in front of a noun or after a noun without any change in meaning. Newspapers were the only available source of information. …the number of teachers available. …the required changes. You’re way below the standard required. …the cost of the suggested improvements. The proposals suggested are derived from successful experiments. Aside from the affected child, the doctor checks every other member of the household. …the proportion of the population affected. Special forms: -ing adjectives 2.63 There are many adjectives ending in -ing. Most of them are related in form to the -ing participles of verbs. In this grammar they are called -ing adjectives. He was an amiable, amusing fellow. He had been up all night attending a dying man. The -ing form is explained in the Reference section. describinganeffect2.64 One group of -ing adjectives describe the effect that something has on your feelings and ideas, or on the feelings and ideas of people in general. …an alarming increase in burglaries. A surprising number of men do not marry. …a charming house on the outskirts of the town. …a warm welcoming smile. 2.65 These adjectives are normally qualitative adjectives. This means that they can be used with a submodifying adverb (a word like very or rather), and have comparatives and superlatives. …a very convincing example. There is nothing very surprising in this. …a very exciting idea. …a really pleasing evening at the theatre. When Bernard moans he’s much more convincing. …one of the most boring books I’ve ever read. 2.66 They can be used in front of a noun or after a linking verb. They can still show amazing loyalty to their parents. It’s amazing what they can do. …the most terrifying tale ever written. The present situation is terrifying. 2.67 These -ing adjectives have a related transitive verb that you use to describe the way someone is affected by something. For example, if you speak of an alarming increase, you mean that the increase alarms you. If you speak of a surprising number, you mean that the number surprises you. Here is a list of -ing adjectives that describe an effect and that have a similar meaning to the usual meaning of the related verb: alarming amazing amusing annoying appalling astonishing astounding bewildering boring challenging charming compelling confusing convincing demeaning depressing devastating disappointing disgusting distracting distressing disturbing embarrassing enchanting encouraging entertaining exciting frightening harassing humiliating infuriating inspiring interesting intimidating intriguing menacing misleading mocking overwhelming pleasing refreshing relaxing rewarding satisfying shocking sickening startling surprising tempting terrifying threatening thrilling tiring welcoming worrying Transitive verbs are explained in paragraphs 3.14 to 3.25. describingaprocessorstate2.68 The other main group of -ing adjectives are used to describe a process or state that continues over a period of time. …her growing band of supporters. Oil and gas drillers are doing a booming business. …a life of increasing labour and decreasing leisure. 2.69 These adjectives are classifying adjectives, so they are not used with words like very and rather. However, adjectives used to identify a process are often modified by adverbs that describe the speed with which the process happens. …a fast diminishing degree of personal freedom. …rapidly rising productivity. 2.70 These -ing adjectives have related intransitive verbs. Here is a list of -ing adjectives that describe a continuing process or state and that have a similar meaning to the usual meaning of the related verb: ageing ailing bleeding booming bursting decreasing diminishing dwindling dying existing increasing living prevailing recurring reigning remaining resounding rising ruling Intransitive verbs are explained in paragraphs 3.8 to 3.13. 2.71 These -ing adjectives are only used in front of a noun, so when -ing forms of intransitive verbs appear after the verb be they are actually part of a progressive form. BECREATIVE2.72 In English, you can make most verbs into adjectives by adding -ing to the verb and putting it in front of the noun, to say what someone or something is doing. …a walking figure. …FIFA, world football’s ruling body. …bands performing in front of screaming crowds. …two years of falling employment. …a tremendous noise of smashing glass. formandmeaning2.73 Most of the -ing adjectives talked about so far are related to verbs. Sometimes however, -ing adjectives are not related to verbs at all. For example, there is no verb to neighbour. Whole families came from neighbouring villages. Here is a list of -ing adjectives that are not related to verbs: appetizing balding cunning enterprising excruciating impending neighbouring scathing unwitting 2.74 Sometimes, an -ing adjective is related to an uncommon use of a verb, or appears to be related to a verb but is not related exactly to any current use. For example, the verb haunt is most commonly used in connection with ghosts, but the adjective haunting is more often used to talk about such things as songs and memories. A haunting tune is a tune you cannot forget. Here is a list of qualitative -ing adjectives that are not related to a common transitive use of a verb: becoming bracing cutting dashing disarming engaging fetching halting haunting moving penetrating piercing pressing promising rambling ravishing retiring revolting searching taxing trying Here is a list of classifying -ing adjectives that are not related to a common intransitive use of a verb: acting driving floating gathering going leading missing running 2.75 Some adjectives are derived from a verb and a prefix. For example, outgoing is derived from the verb go and the prefix out-. There is no verb to outgo. Wouldn’t that cause a delay in outgoing mail? Here is a list of -ing adjectives derived from a verb and a prefix: forthcoming incoming oncoming ongoing outgoing outstanding overarching overbearing uplifting upstanding 2.76 A small group of -ing adjectives are used in informal spoken English for emphasis, usually to express disapproval. This use is explained in paragraphs 2.41 to 2.42. Some compound adjectives (see paragraphs 2.94 to 2.102) end in -ing. Special forms: -ed adjectives 2.77 A large number of English adjectives end in -ed. Many of them have the same form as the -ed participle of a verb. Others are formed by adding ed to a noun. Others are not closely related to any other words. …a disappointed man. …a bearded man. …sophisticated electronic devices. 2.78 Adjectives with the same form as irregular -ed participles (see the Reference section) that do not end in -ed are also included here as -ed adjectives. Was it a broken bone, a torn ligament, or what? The -ed participles of some phrasal verbs (see paragraphs 3.83 to 3.116) can also be used as adjectives. When they are used in front of a noun, the two parts of the phrasal verb are usually written with a hyphen between them. …the built-up urban mass of the city. 2.79 Most -ed adjectives are related to a transitive verb and have a passive meaning. They show that something has happened or is happening to the thing being described. For example, a frightened person is a person who has been frightened by something. A known criminal is a criminal who is known by the police. We have a long list of satisfied customers. We cannot refuse to teach children the required subjects. qualitative-edadjectives2.80 -ed adjectives that refer to a person’s mental or emotional reaction to something are generally qualitative. He was a worried old man. …a bored old woman. …an interested student. These adjectives can be modified by words such as very and extremely, just like other qualitative adjectives (see paragraphs 2.140 to 2.156). formandmeaning2.81 Like other adjectives used for talking about feelings, these adjectives are often used to describe the expression, voice, or manner of the person affected, instead of referring directly to that person. …her big blue frightened eyes. She could hear his agitated voice. Barry gave him a worried look. 2.82 Here is a list of qualitative -ed adjectives that have a similar meaning to the most common meaning of the related verb: agitated alarmed amused appalled astonished bored confused contented delighted depressed deprived disappointed disgusted disillusioned distressed embarrassed excited frightened inhibited interested pleased preoccupied puzzled satisfied shocked surprised tired troubled worried Here is a list of qualitative -ed adjectives that do not have a similar meaning to the usual meaning of the related verb: animated attached concerned determined disposed disturbed guarded hurt inclined mixed strained classifying-edadjectives2.83 Many other -ed adjectives are used for classifying, and so cannot be used with words like very and rather. For example, a furnished apartment is one type of apartment, contrasting with an apartment without furniture. …a furnished apartment. …a painted wooden bowl. …the closed bedroom door. Most adjectives that refer to physical distinctions are classifying adjectives. 2.84 Here is a list of classifying -ed adjectives that have a similar meaning to the most common meaning of the related verb: abandoned armed blocked boiled broken canned classified closed concentrated condemned cooked divided drawn dried established fixed furnished haunted hidden improved infected integrated known licensed loaded paid painted processed reduced required torn trained united wasted Here is list of -ed classifying adjectives that have a different meaning from the most common meaning of the related verb: advanced marked noted pointed spotted veiled modifying-edadjectives2.85 Classifying -ed adjectives cannot normally be modified with words like quite and very. However, an adverb of manner, (see paragraphs 6.36 to 6.44) or an adverb of degree, (see paragraphs 6.45 to 6.52) is often used before an -ed adjective. For example, a pleasantly furnished furnished with pleasant furniture. room is a room that has been …pleasantly furnished rooms. …a well-known novelist. 2.86 Some -ed adjectives are not often used on their own, and an adverb is necessary to complete the sense. You do not usually talk about dressed people, but you can say that they are well dressed or smartly dressed for example. The -ed adjectives in the following examples nearly always have an adverb in front of them. …a cautiously worded statement. …impeccably dressed men. It was a richly deserved honour. …superbly cut clothes. …the existence of a highly developed national press. …a well organized campaign. …a tall, powerfully built man. She gazed down at his perfectly formed little face. Note that combinations like this are sometimes hyphenated, making them compound adjectives. …a well-equipped army. -edadjectiveswithanactivemeaning2.87 A few -ed adjectives are related to the -ed participle of intransitive verbs and have an active meaning, not a passive meaning. For example, a fallen tree is a tree that has fallen. …a capsized ship. She is the daughter of a retired army officer. …an escaped prisoner. Here is a list of -ed adjectives with an active meaning: accumulated dated escaped faded fallen retired swollen wilted -edadjectivesafterlinkingverbs-edadjectivesafterlinkingverbs2.88 Most -ed adjectives can be used both in front of a noun and after a linking verb. The worried authorities decided to play safe. My husband was worried. A small number of -ed adjectives are normally only used after a linking verb. Often, they are followed by a preposition, a to-infinitive, or a that-clause. I was thrilled by the exhibition. The Brazilians are pleased with the results. …food destined for areas of south Sudan. He was always prepared to account for his actions. Here is a list of -ed adjectives often used after a linking verb, with or without a phrase or clause after them: convinced delighted interested intimidated intrigued involved pleased prepared scared thrilled tired touched Here is a list of -ed adjectives normally used after a linking verb with a phrase or clause after them: agreed destined dressed finished lost prepared shut stuck BECREATIVE2.89 The -ed participle of almost any transitive verb can be used as an adjective, though some are more commonly used than others. …she said, with a forced smile. There was one paid tutor and three volunteer tutors. The recovered animals will be released. …the final corrected version. BECREATIVE2.90 Some -ed adjectives are formed from nouns. For example, if a living thing has wings, you can describe it as winged. If someone has skills, you can describe them as skilled. …winged angels. …a skilled engineer. She was dressed in black and carried a black beaded purse. …armoured cars. …the education of gifted children. -edadjectivesformedfromnouns2.91 Here is a list of -ed adjectives formed from nouns: armoured barbed beaded bearded detailed flowered freckled gifted gloved hooded mannered pointed principled salaried skilled spotted striped turbaned walled winged -ed adjectives formed from nouns are commonly used as the second part of compound adjectives (see paragraph 2.94 to 2.102) such as greyhaired and open-minded. -edadjectivesunrelatedtoverbsornouns2.92 There are also some -ed adjectives in regular use that are not related to verbs or nouns in the ways described above. For example, there are no words parch or belove. There is a noun concert, but the adjective concerted does not mean having a concert. He climbed up the dry parched grass to the terrace steps. …a complex and antiquated system of taxation. …attempts to mount a concerted campaign. …the purchase of expensive sophisticated equipment. 2.93 Here is a list of -ed adjectives that are not related to verbs or nouns: antiquated ashamed assorted beloved bloated concerted crazed deceased doomed indebted parched rugged sophisticated tinned Compound adjectives 2.94 Compound adjectives are made up of two or more words, usually written with hyphens between them. They may be qualitative, classifying, or colour adjectives. I was in a light-hearted mood. She was dressed in a bottle-green party dress. …the built-up urban mass of the city. …an air-conditioned restaurant. …a good-looking girl. …one-way traffic. …a part-time job. formationpatterns2.95 These are the most common and least restricted patterns for forming compound adjectives: adjective or number plus noun plus -ed, e.g. grey-haired and one-sided adjective or adverb plus -ed participle, e.g. low-paid and well-behaved adjective, adverb, or noun plus -ing participle, e.g. good-looking, long-lasting and man-eating. Note that compound adjectives describe simple concepts: a good-looking person looks good, and a man-eating beast eats humans. More complex descriptions in English need to be given using a following phrase or or the nature of the thing (e.g. a bottle), linked by of to a noun that indicates what the thing is (e.g. water). For example, if you say a forest of pines, you are talking about a large area of trees. Similarly, you can talk about a border of roses. This structure can be extended very widely, so that you can talk about a city of dreaming spires, for example. Referring to an exact number of things: numbers cardinalnumbers2.208 When you want to refer to an exact number of things, you use numbers such as two, thirty, and 777, which are called cardinal numbers, or sometimes cardinals. I’m going to ask you thirty questions. …two hundred and sixty copies of the record. The cardinal numbers are listed in the Reference section and their use is explained in paragraphs 2.213 to 2.231. ordinalnumbers2.209 When you want to identify or describe something by showing where it comes in a series or sequence, you use an ordinal number, or an ordinal, such as first, second, fourteenth, or twenty-seventh. She received a video camera for her fourteenth birthday. I repeated my story for the third time that day. The ordinal numbers are listed in the Reference section and their use is explained in paragraphs 2.232 to 2.239. fractions2.210 When you want to show how large a part of something is compared to the whole of it, you use a fraction such as a third or three-quarters. A third of the American forces were involved. The bottle was about three-quarters full when he started. It is a job that takes anything from two to five weeks. Expanding the noun phrase 2.272 This section deals with structures that are used to add further information about the person or thing referred to. These are called qualifiers. The word that is qualified is usually a noun but can be an indefinite pronoun or those. possiblestructures2.273 The structures that are dealt with in this section are prepositional phrases …a girl with red hair. …the man in the dark glasses. The use of prepositional phrases to expand the noun phrase is explained in paragraphs 2.275 to 2.290. adjectives followed by phrases or clauses …machinery capable of clearing rubble off the main roads. …the type of comments likely to provoke criticism. …a concept inconceivable a hundred years earlier. The use of adjectives followed by phrases or clauses to expand the noun phrase is explained in paragraphs 2.291 to 2.292. non-finite clauses …a simple device to test lung function. …two of the problems mentioned above. He gestured towards the three cards lying on the table. The use of non-finite clauses to expand the noun phrase is explained in paragraphs 2.293 to 2.301. noun phrases giving further information about other noun phrases. This is explained in paragraph 2.302. 2.274 Some other structures are also used. These are explained fully in other sections. They include single words such as galore and concerned, which are explained in paragraphs 2.58 to 2.62. relative clauses Shortly after the shooting, the man who had done it was arrested. Where’s that cake your mother made? Relative clauses are explained in paragraphs 8.83 to 8.116. place adverbs and time adverbials …down in the dungeon beneath. …a reflection of life today in England. Time adverbials are explained in Chapter 4 and adverbs of place are explained in paragraphs 6.53 to 6.72. Nouns with prepositional phrases 2.275 In general, any prepositional phrase that describes or classifies something can be used directly after a noun or pronoun. …the man in charge. …a film about four men on holiday. She reached into the room behind her. 2.276 In particular, there are several kinds of prepositional phrase that are usually only used in this way. Of these, prepositional phrases beginning with of are the most numerous. Others include certain uses of with, in and by. of2.277 Many nouns referring to things and actions can be expanded by using prepositional phrases beginning with of after them. This allows the noun to be expanded with a wide range of meanings. You can use of with nouns referring to feelings such as love and fear to show what the feeling relates to; for example, fear of flying and love of animals. Further meanings are described in the following paragraphs. BECAREFUL2.278 Personal pronouns are not usually placed after of. For example, you cannot say Joyce was the daughter of him or the pages of it. Possessive determiners are used instead to show possession. These are explained in paragraphs 1.194 to 1.210. 2.279 Prepositional phrases beginning with of can be used to show what something consists of. …a letter of confirmation. …strong feelings of jealousy. They can also be used to show what the subject matter of something is. …a picture of a house. …Gretchen’s account of her interview with Nichols. …the idea of death. 2.280 Prepositional phrases beginning with of can be used to say that something belongs to or is associated with someone or something. Cental is a trademark of Monotore Ltd. No.28 was the town house of Sir Winston Churchill. James is the son of a Methodist minister. The acting ability of the pupils is admirable. …the beauty of the Welsh landscape. Four boys sat on the floor of the living room. Ellen aimlessly turned the pages of her magazine. Note that apostrophe s (’s) structures are much more frequently used to say that something belongs to someone or something. Apostrophe s (’s) is explained in paragraphs 1.211 to 1.222. 2.281 Prepositional phrases beginning with of can be used to say that someone or something has a particular quality. …a woman of energy and ambition. …problems of varying complexity. …a flower of monstrous proportions. A household of this size inevitably has problems. Of can also be used in front of a number to indicate someone’s age. …a woman of twenty-two. …a child of six. Other ways of talking about age are explained in paragraphs 2.258 to 2.263. 2.282 Prepositional phrases beginning with of can be used with nouns referring to an action to show who or what is performing the action. …the arrival of the police. …the growth of modern industry. They are also used to show who or what someone does something to. For example, if you are talking about people who support a scheme, you can call them the supporters of the scheme. …supporters of the hunger strike. …critics of the Trade Union Movement. …the creator of the universe. …a student of English. …the cause of the tragedy. Of structures are also used to indicate the thing affected by an action. …the destruction of their city. …the dismissal of hundreds of workers. 2.283 Prepositional phrases beginning with of and containing measurement are used to show how great an area, speed, distance, or temperature is. There were fires burning over a total area of about 600 square miles. It can barely maintain a speed of 25 kilometres an hour. …an average annual temperature of 20°. Ways of measuring things are explained in paragraphs 2.250 to 2.257. with2.284 Prepositional phrases beginning with with can be used to say that someone or something has a particular characteristic, feature, or possession. …a girl with red hair. …a girl with a foreign accent. …a big car with reclining seats. …a man with a violent temper. …the man with the gun. …those with large families. They are also used to indicate what something has on or in it. …a sheet of paper with writing on it. …a round box with some buttons in it. …a white, plain envelope with her name printed on it. …fragments of wrapping paper with bits of sticky tape still adhering to them. in2.285 Prepositional phrases beginning with in can be used to say what someone is wearing. …a grey-haired man in a raincoat. …the man in the dark glasses. …little groups of people in black. by2.286 Prepositional phrases beginning with by can be used after a noun referring to an action to say who or what is performing it. …his appointment by the King. …the compression of air by the piston. withprepositionalphrases2.287 Some nouns, especially abstract nouns, need to be followed by a prepositional phrase to show what they relate to. There is often little or no choice about which preposition to use after a particular noun. He has an allergy to peanuts. …his authority over them. …the solution to our energy problem. …the bond between mother and child. 2.288 Here is a list of nouns that usually or often have to after them: access addiction adherence affront allegiance allergy allusion alternative answer antidote approach attachment aversion contribution damage devotion disloyalty exception fidelity incitement introduction preface prelude recourse reference relevance reply resistance return sequel solution susceptibility testimony threat vulnerability witness Here is a list of nouns that usually or often have for after them: admiration appetite aptitude bid craving credit cure demand desire disdain dislike disregard disrespect hunger love need provision quest recipe regard remedy respect responsibility room search substitute sympathy synonym taste thirst demand Here is a list of nouns that usually or often have on after them: assault attack ban claim comment concentration constraint crackdown curb dependence effect embargo hold insistence reflection reliance restriction stance tax Here is a list of nouns that usually or often have with after them: affinity collision collusion connection contrast correspondence date dealings dissatisfaction encounter familiarity identification intersection intimacy involvement link parity quarrel relationship sympathy Here is a list of nouns that are usually followed by one of two prepositions. The list indicates the choice of prepositions available: agreement about agreement on argument against argument for battle against battle for case against case for debate about debate on decision about decision on transition from transition to Here is a list of other nouns that are usually followed by a preposition. complex about crime against grudge against insurance against reaction against safeguard against anger at bond between departure from escape from excerpt from freedom from quotation from foray into relapse into awareness of authority over control over As you can see from the lists and examples given above, it is often the case that words with a similar meaning are typically followed by the same preposition. For example, appetite, craving, desire, hunger, and thirst are all followed by for. USAGENOTE2.289 Some nouns are related to verbs that are always or often followed by a particular preposition. These nouns are followed by the same preposition as their related verbs, and they are used to indicate the thing that is affected by the action. For example, to is used after both the verb refer and the related noun reference. We have already referred to this phenomenon. …reverent references to the importance of home. They swim about busily searching for food. …the search for food. I want to escape from here. …an escape from reality. 2.290 Some nouns referring to a feeling or state are related to an adjective that is usually followed by a preposition. These nouns are followed by the same preposition as their related adjectives. For example, of is used after the adjective aware and the related noun awareness. She was quite aware of her current situation. …the public’s increasing awareness of the problems. He was angry at Sally Gardner for accusing him. …her anger at the kids. Nouns with adjectives 2.291 When adjectives are used in clauses after nouns or pronouns to expand their meaning they can be followed by prepositional phrases …a warning to people eager for a quick cure. those responsible for the project. a to-infinitive …remarks likely to cause offence. It has been directed against those least able to retaliate. expressions of time or place …a concept inconceivable a hundred years earlier. For the facilities available here, I must ask for a fee. Note that you can use adjectives as qualifiers when they are preceded by time or measurement expressions. …those still alive. …a small hill about 400 feet high. Note also that a few adjectives, such as present and responsible, can be used on their own after a noun or pronoun. The use of these adjectives is explained in paragraphs 2.58 to 2.62. otherstructures2.292 There are some other structures, especially those that indicate comparison, degree, or result, that often involve a qualifying structure. In particular, some words that modify adjectives, such as more, too, or so, often have a qualifying structure to complete their meaning. Peter came in, more excited than anyone had seen him before. Ralph was too angry to think clearly. …steel cylinders strong enough to survive a nuclear catastrophe. …a grand piano as big as two coffins. She was so ill that she couldn’t eat. Technology has made such spectacular advances that it is difficult to keep up. The use of comparative adjectives plus than after noun phrases is explained in paragraphs 2.106 to 2.108. Other ways of comparing things are explained in paragraphs 2.123 to 2.139. The use of so…that and such…that is explained in paragraphs 8.58 to 8.63. Nouns followed by to-infinitive, -ed participle, or -ing participle: something to eat, a girl called Patricia, a basket containing eggs 2.293 The following non-finite clauses (= clauses containing a verb that has no tense) can be used to expand the meaning of a noun: to-infinitive clauses (see paragraphs 2.294 to 2.299), -ed participle clauses (see paragraph 2.300), and -ing participle clauses (see paragraph 2.301). nounsfollowedbyto-infinitiveclauses2.294 A to-infinitive clause is often placed after nouns in order to show what the thing referred to is intended to do. The government of Mexico set up a programme to develop new varieties of wheat. They need people to work in the factories. 2.295 You can refer to something or someone that should or can have something done to them by using a clause containing a to-infinitive after a noun or indefinite pronoun. I make notes in the back of my diary of things to be mended or replaced. …when I’ve had something to eat. You can also use a clause consisting of a to-infinitive followed by a preposition. There wasn’t even a chair to sit on. He had nothing to write with. 2.296 You can also use a to-infinitive clause when you want to say that you are talking about, for example, the first, oldest, or only person who did something. …the first woman to be elected to the council. 2.297 A clause containing a to-infinitive is used after some abstract nouns to show what action they relate to. …people who didn’t have the opportunity to go to university. USAGENOTE2.298 Many of these nouns are related to verbs or adjectives that are also often followed by to-infinitive clauses. For example, a to-infinitive clause is used after both the verb need and the noun need, and after both the adjective able and the related noun ability. I need to borrow five thousand dollars. …the need to preserve secrecy about their intentions. It failed to grow. 2.299 Here is a list of nouns that usually or often have a to-infinitive clause after them: ability attempt bid chance compulsion desire disinclination failure inability inclination need opportunity readiness reason refusal unwillingness urge way willingness nounsfollowedby-edparticipleclausesnounsfollowedby-edparticipleclauses2.300 A clause containing an -ed participle can be used directly after a noun to show that something has been produced or affected by an action. …a girl called Patricia. …dresses made of paper. …two of the problems mentioned above. …a story written by a nine-year-old girl. nounsfollowedby-ingparticipleclauses2.301 A clause containing an -ing participle can be used directly after a noun to show that someone or something is doing something. He gestured towards the three cards lying on the table. …a wicker shopping-basket containing groceries. withanidentifyingnounphrase2.302 You can give further information about someone or something by using a noun phrase that describes them or identifies them. If you put this noun phrase after the main noun phrase, a comma is almost always put after the main noun phrase because the second noun phrase is separate from it, not part of it. …the bald eagle, the symbol of America. …David Beckham, a first-class football player. Her mother, a Canadian, died when she was six. If you put this noun phrase before the main noun phrase, you can sometimes choose whether to use a comma to separate the two noun phrases or not. …Joan’s husband, Jim Inglis. …my husband George. 8 Combining messages 8.1 Sometimes a statement is too complex or detailed to be expressed in a single clause. You make statements of this kind by putting two or more clauses together in one sentence. There are two ways in which you can do this. One way is to use one clause as a main clause and to add other subordinate clauses. A subordinate clause is a clause that depends on the main clause to complete its meaning, and that cannot form a sentence on its own. For this reason, in some grammars, it is called a dependent clause. I came because I want you to help me. I didn’t like the man who did the gardening for them. You have no right to keep people off your land unless they are doing damage. When he had gone, Valentina sighed. The other way is simply to link clauses together. I’m an old man and I’m sick. I like films but I don’t go to the cinema very often. Questions and orders can also consist of more than one clause. What will I do if he doesn’t come? If she is ambitious, don’t try to hold her back. Clauses are explained in Chapters 3 and 5. conjunctions8.2 When you put two clauses into one sentence, you use a conjunction to link them and to show the relationship between them. When he stopped, no one said anything. They were going by car because it was more comfortable. The telephone rang and Judy picked it up. The food looked good, but I was too full to eat. 8.3 There are two types of conjunction. They show the different types of relationship between clauses in a sentence. subordinatingconjunctions8.4 When you are adding a clause in order to develop an aspect of what you are saying, you use a subordinating conjunction. The cat jumped onto my father’s lap while he was reading his letters. He had cancer although it was detected at an early stage. When the jar was full, he turned the water off. A clause that begins with a subordinating conjunction is called a subordinate clause. When an atom is split, it releases neutrons. If he had won, he would have shared the money. The house was called Sea View, although there were no sea anywhere in sight. You can also add subordinate clauses to questions and imperative clauses. How long is it since you’ve actually taught? Make a plan before you start. Sentences containing a main clause and one or more subordinate clauses are often called complex sentences. There are three main kinds of subordinate clause: Adverbial clauses: these are dealt with in paragraphs 8.6 to 8.82. Relative clauses: these are dealt with in paragraphs 8.83 to 8.116. Nominal that-clauses: those relating to reported speech and thought are referred to as reported clauses, and are dealt with in Chapter 7; those relating to facts are dealt with in paragraphs 8.117 to 8.128. coordinatingconjunctions8.5 If you are simply linking clauses, you use a coordinating conjunction. Her son lives at home and has a steady job. He’s a shy man, but he’s not scared of anything or anyone. You can also put coordinating conjunctions between questions and between imperative clauses. Did you buy those curtains or do you make your own? Visit your local dealer or phone for a brochure. Clauses joined by a coordinating conjunction are called coordinate clauses. She turned and left the room. Sentences that contain coordinate clauses are sometimes called compound sentences. A full explanation of coordinate clauses is given in paragraphs 8.149 to 8.163. Other uses of coordinating conjunctions are explained in paragraphs 8.164 to 8.201. Adverbial clauses 8.6 There are eight types of adverbial clause: type of clause time clauses conditional clauses purpose clauses reason clauses result clauses concessive clauses place clauses clauses of manner usual conjunction paragraphs when, before, after since, paragraphs 8.8 to 8.24 while, as, until if, unless paragraphs 8.25 to 8.42 in order to, so that paragraphs 8.43 to 8.48 because, since, as paragraphs 8.49 to 8.53 so that paragraphs 8.54 to 8.64 although, though, while paragraphs 8.65 to 8.72 where, wherever paragraphs 8.73 to 8.77 as, like, the way paragraphs 8.78 to 8.82 Non-finite clauses, when they begin with a subordinating conjunction, are dealt with in the sections dealing with adverbial clauses. Non-finite clauses that do not begin with a subordinating conjunction are dealt with separately in paragraphs 8.129 to 8.145. Other structures that function like non-finite clauses are described in paragraphs 8.146 to 8.148. positionofadverbialclausepositionofadverbialclause8.7 The usual position for an adverbial clause is just after the main clause. I couldn’t think of a single thing to say after he’d replied like that. The performances were cancelled because the leading man was ill. However, most types of adverbial clause can be put in front of a main clause. When the city is dark, we can move around easily. Although crocodiles are inactive for long periods, on occasion they can run very fast indeed. Occasionally, you can put an adverbial clause in the middle of another clause. They make allegations which, when you analyse them, do not have too many facts behind them. There are a few types of adverbial clause that always go after a main clause; other types always go in front of one. This is explained in the sections dealing with the different types of clause. Time clauses: When I was young, … 8.8 Time clauses are used for saying when something happens, by referring to a period of time or to another event. Her father died when she was young. Stocks of food cannot be brought in before the rains start. He was detained last Monday after he returned from a business trip overseas. When I first arrived I didn’t know anyone. Time clauses can be used after time adverbials. We’ll give him his presents tomorrow, before he goes to school. I want to see you for a few minutes at twelve o’clock, when you go to lunch. Time adverbials are explained in Chapter 4. tensesintimeclauses8.9 When you are talking about the past or the present, the verb in a time clause has the same tense that it would have in a main clause or in a simple sentence. I was standing by the window when I heard her speak. I look after the children while she goes to Denver. However, if the time clause refers to something that will happen or exist in the future, you use the present simple, not the future. For example, you say When he comes, I will show him the book, not When he will come, I will show him the book. As soon as we get the tickets, we’ll send them to you. He wants to see you before he dies. Let me stay here till Jeannie comes home. If you mention an event in a time clause that will happen before an event referred to in the main clause, you use the present perfect in the time clause, not the future perfect. For example, you say When you have had your supper, come and see me, not When you will have had your supper, come and see me. We won’t be getting married until we’ve saved enough money. Come and tell me when you have finished. 8.10 The most common conjunction in time clauses is when. When is used to say that something happened, happens, or will happen on a particular occasion. When the telegram came and I read of his death, I couldn’t believe it. He didn’t know how to behave when they next met. 8.11 You can mention the circumstances in which something happens or happened by using when, while, or as. The train has automatic doors that only open when the train is stationary. While he was still in the stable, there was a loud knock at the front door. He would swim beside me as I rowed in the little dinghy. Whilst is a more formal form of while. We chatted whilst the children played in the crèche. Whilst is not used in modern American English. USAGENOTE8.12 If you want to emphasize that something happened at a particular time, you can use It was followed by an expression such as six o’clock or three hours later, followed by a when-clause. For example, instead of saying I left at six o’clock, you say It was six o’clock when I left. It was about half past eight when he arrived at Gatwick. It was late when he returned. This is an example of a split sentence. Split sentences are explained in paragraphs 9.25 to 9.30. repeatedevents8.13 If you want to say that something always happened or happens in particular circumstances, you use when, whenever, every time, or each time. When he talks about Ireland, he does sound like an outsider. Whenever she had a cold, she ate only fruit. Every time I go to that class I panic. He looked away each time she spoke to him. 8.14 You use an expression such as the first time, the next time, or the third time to say that something happened during one occurrence of an event. The last time we talked he said he needed another two days. The next time I come here, I’m going to be better. eventsinsequence8.15 You can also use when, after, or once to talk about one event happening immediately after another. When his wife left him he suffered terribly. Stop me when you’ve had enough. The turtle returns to the sea after it has laid its eggs. Once the damage is done, it takes many years for the system to recover. If you want to say how long one event happened after another, you put a noun phrase such as two days or three years in front of after. Exactly six weeks after she had arrived, she sent a cable to her husband and caught the plane back to New York. As soon as, directly, immediately, the moment, the minute, and the instant are all used to talk about one event happening a very short time after another. They heard voices as soon as they pushed open the door. The minute someone left the room, the others started talking about them. Immediately the meal was over, it was time for prayer. The words directly and immediately are not used as conjunctions in American English. 8.16 When you want to say that something happened, happens, or will happen at an earlier time than something else, you use before. It was necessary for them to find a home before the cold weather arrived. Before they moved to the city she had never seen a car. If you want to say how long one event happened before another, you put a noun phrase such as three weeks or a short time in front of before. He had a review with the second organiser, about a month before the report was written. Long before you return she will have forgotten you. 8.17 When you are telling a story, you sometimes want to say what was happening when a particular event occurred. You first say what was happening, then add a clause beginning with when in which you mention the event. I had just finished my meal when I heard voices. He was having his dinner when the telephone rang. If you want to say that one event happened a very short time after another, you use a clause in the past perfect, followed by a time clause in the past simple. After had in the first clause, you put no sooner or hardly. When you use no sooner, the time clause begins with than. I had no sooner checked into the hotel than he arrived with the appropriate documents. When you use hardly, the time clause begins with when or before. He had hardly got his eyes open before she told him that they were leaving. No sooner or, less frequently, hardly can be put at the beginning of the first clause, followed by had and the subject. No sooner had he asked the question than the answer came to him. Hardly had he settled into his seat when Alan came bursting in. Hardly had he got on his horse before people started firing at him. 8.18 When something is the case because of a new situation, you can say what is the case and then add a subordinate clause saying what the new situation is. The subordinate clause begins with now that. In British English you can leave out that. He could travel much faster now that he was alone. I feel better now I’ve talked to you. sayingwhenasituationbegan8.19 If you want to say that a situation started to exist at a particular time and still exists, you use since or ever since. In the time clause, you use the past simple. I’ve been in politics since I was at university. It’s been making money ever since it opened. You also use since or ever since to say that a situation started to exist at a particular time, and still existed at a later time. In the time clause, you use the past simple or the past perfect. He had been tired ever since he started work. Janine had been busy ever since she had heard the news. If you are mentioning someone’s age at the time when a situation started, you always use the past simple. I was seven years older than Wendy and had known her since she was twelve. Since is also used in reason clauses. This is explained in paragraph 8.50. sayingwhenasituationends8.20 If you want to say that a situation stopped when something happened, you use until or till. I stayed there talking to them until I saw Sam Ward leave the building. We waited till they arrived. You also use until or till to say that a situation will stop when something happens in the future. In the time clause you use the present simple or the present perfect. Stay with me until I go. We’ll support them till they find work. Tell him I won’t discuss anything until I’ve spoken to my wife. 8.21 By which time, at which point, after which, whereupon, and upon which are also used at the beginning of time clauses. You use by which time to say that something had already happened or will already have happened before the event you have just mentioned. He was diagnosed in 1999, by which time he was already very ill. You use at which point to say that something happened immediately after the event you have just mentioned. The company closed in the late seventies, at which point he retired. You use after which to say that a situation started to exist or will start to exist after the event you have just mentioned. The items were removed for chemical analysis, after which they were never seen again. You use whereupon or upon which to say that something happened immediately after the event you have just mentioned and was a result of it. Both of these uses are rather formal. His department was shut down, whereupon he returned to Calcutta. I told Dr Johnson of this, upon which he called for Joseph. USAGENOTE8.22 You can use a clause beginning with when after a question beginning with why. For example, you can say Why should I help her when she never helps me? However this clause is not a time clause. In your question, you are expressing surprise or disagreement at something that has been said, and the when-clause indicates the reason for your surprise or disagreement. Why should he do me an injury when he has already saved my life? Why worry her when it’s all over? usingnon-finiteclauses8.23 Instead of using a finite time clause, you can often use a non-finite clause, that is, a clause that contains an -ing or -ed participle. For example, you can say I often read a book when travelling by train, meaning I often read a book when I am travelling by train, and you can say When finished, the building will be opened by the Prince of Wales, meaning When it is finished, the building will be opened by the Prince of Wales. Adults sometimes do not realize their own strength when dealing with children. Mark watched us while pretending not to. I deliberately didn’t read the book before going to see the film. After complaining of a headache for a few days, Gerry agreed to see a doctor. They had not spoken a word since leaving the party. Michael used to look surprised when praised. Once convinced about an idea, he pursued it relentlessly. Note that you can only use a clause like this when it does not need to have a new subject, that is, when it is about the same thing as the main clause. usingprepositionalphrasesandadjectives8.24 For some statements about time, you can use a phrase consisting of when, while, once, until, or till, followed by a prepositional phrase or an adjective. For example, you can say, When in Paris, you should visit the Louvre, meaning When you are in Paris, you should visit the Louvre. He had read of her experiences while at Oxford. When under threat, they can become violent. Steam or boil them until just tender. You can use a phrase consisting of when, whenever, where, or wherever and an adjective such as necessary or possible. For example, you can say You should take exercise whenever possible, meaning You should take exercise whenever it is possible. She spoke rarely, and then only when necessary. Try to speak the truth whenever possible. Help must be given where necessary. All experts agree that, wherever possible, children should learn to read in their own way. Conditional clauses: If I had more money, … 8.25 When you want to talk about a possible situation and its consequences, you use a conditional clause. Conditional clauses are used: to talk about a situation that sometimes exists or existed If they lose weight during an illness, they soon regain it afterwards. Government cannot operate effectively unless it is free to take its own decisions. If I saw him in the street, he’d just say Good morning. to talk about a situation that you know does not exist If England had a hot climate, the attitude would be different. If I could afford it I would buy a boat. to talk about a situation when you do not know whether it exists or not If he is right it would be possible once more to manage the economy in the old way. The interval seemed unnecessary, unless it was to give them a break. to talk about a situation that may exist in the future. If I leave my job I’ll have no money to live on. If I went back on the train it’d be cheaper. Don’t bring her unless she’s ready. 8.26 Conditional clauses usually begin with if or unless. You use if to say that a consequence of something happening or being the case would be that something else would happen or be the case. If you do that I shall be very pleased. If I asked for something I got it. They will even clean your car if you ask them to. When an if-clause is put first, then is sometimes put at the beginning of the main clause. If this is what was happening in the Sixties, then I’m glad I wasn’t around then. Unless means except if. For example, You will fail your exams unless you work harder means You will fail your exams except if you work harder. There can be no new growth unless the ground is cleared. Nobody gets anything unless they ask for it. Clauses beginning with unless usually go after a main clause. modalsandimperatives8.27 When you are using a conditional clause, you often use a modal in the main clause. You always use a modal in the main clause when you are talking about a situation that does not exist. If you weren’t here, she would get rid of me in no time. If anybody had asked me, I could have told them what happened. Modals are explained in paragraphs 5.94 to 5.258. Conditional clauses are often used with imperative structures. If you dry your washing outdoors, wipe the line first. If it’s four o’clock in the morning, don’t expect them to be pleased to see you. Imperative structures are explained in paragraphs 5.4 and 5.37 to 5.41. verbformsinconditionalsentences8.28 There are special rules about which verb form to use in conditional sentences. People often describe conditional structures in terms of three, or sometimes four (see zero conditional below), categories: the first conditional, in which the verb in the main clause is will or shall and the verb in the conditional clause is in the present simple. I’ll scream if you say that again. the second conditional, in which the verb in the main clause is would or should and the verb in the conditional clause is in the past simple. If I had more time, I would happily offer to help. the third conditional, in which the verb in the main clause is would have or should have and the verb in the conditional clause is in the past perfect. If I had tried a bit harder, I would have passed that exam. the zero conditional, in which the verb in both clauses is in the present simple. Water boils if you heat it to 100°C. Many conditionals do follow these patterns. There are, however, various other normal patterns of tense in conditional clauses, which are set out in the following paragraphs. talkingaboutthingsthatoftenhappen8.29 When you are talking about something that often happens, you use the present simple or the present progressive in the conditional clause and in the main clause. If a big dog approaches me, I panic. He never rings me up unless he wants something. If the baby’s crying, she probably needs feeding. If an advertisement conveys information which is false or misleading, the advertiser is committing an offence. talkingaboutthingsthatoftenhappenedinthepast8.30 When you are talking about something that often happened in the past, you use the past simple or the past progressive in the conditional clause. In the main clause, you use the past simple or a modal. They sat on the grass if it was fine. If it was raining, we usually stayed indoors. If anyone came, they’d say How are you? If they wanted to go out, I would stay with the baby. I could not fall asleep unless I did an hour of yoga. possiblesituations8.31 When you are talking about a possible situation in the present, you usually use the present simple or the present perfect in the conditional clause. In the main clause you usually use a modal. If anyone doubts this, they should look at the facts. Unless you’ve tried it, you can’t imagine how pleasant it is. If-clauses of this kind are sometimes used when you are offering to do something, or giving permission for something to be done. You use a modal in the main clause, and the subordinate clause consists of if,a pronoun, and want, like, or wish. I’ll teach you, if you want. You can leave if you like. thingsthatmighthappeninthefuture8.32 When you are talking about something that might happen in the future, you use the present simple in the conditional clause, and will or shall in the main clause. If I survive this experience, I’ll never leave you again. Willie will never achieve anything unless he is pushed. USAGENOTE8.33 A more formal way of talking about a possible future situation is to use should in the conditional clause. For example, instead of saying If anything happens, I will return immediately, you can say If anything should happen, I will return immediately. In the main clause you use a modal, usually will or would. If that should happen, you will be blamed. Another way of talking about a possible future situation is to use were and a to-infinitive in a conditional clause. For example, instead of saying If he goes, I will go too, you can say If he were to go, I would go too. In the main clause you use would, should, or might. If we were to move north, we would be able to buy a bigger house. unlikelysituations8.34 When you are talking about an unlikely situation, you use the past simple in the conditional clause, and would, should, or might in the main clause. The older men would find it difficult to get a job if they left the farm. I should be surprised if it was less than five pounds. If I frightened them, they might run away and I would never see them again. In the conditional clause, were is sometimes used instead of was, especially after I. If I were a guy, I would look like my dad. If I were asked to define my condition, I’d say bored. whatmighthavebeen8.35 When you are talking about something that might have happened in the past but did not happen, you use the past perfect in the conditional clause. In the main clause, you use would have, could have, should have, or might have. Perhaps if he had realized that, he would have run away while there was still time. If she had not been ill, she would probably have won that race. puttingtheverbfirst8.36 In formal or literary English, if the first verb in an if-clause is should, were, or had, this verb is sometimes put at the beginning of the clause and if is omitted. For example, instead of saying If any visitors should come, I will say you are not here, someone might say Should any visitors come, I will say you are not here. Should ministers demand an inquiry, we would welcome it. Were it all true, it would still not excuse their actions. Were they to stop advertising, prices would be significantly reduced. Had I known how important it was, I would have filmed the occasion. USAGENOTE8.37 Instead of using a conditional clause containing the word be, you can sometimes use a phrase consisting of if followed by an adjective or a prepositional phrase. For example, instead of saying We will sell the car, if it is necessary, you can say We will sell the car, if necessary. This unfortunate situation is to be avoided if possible. If I were innocent, I’d rather be tried here; if guilty, in America. If in doubt, ask at your local library. necessaryconditions8.38 If you want to say that one situation is necessary for another, you use provided, providing, as long as, so long as, or only if. Provided and providing are often followed by that. Ordering is quick and easy provided you have access to the internet. Provided that it’s not too much money I’d love to come to Spain. The oven bakes magnificent bread providing it is hot enough. They are happy for the world to stay as it is, as long as they are comfortable. These activities can flourish only if agriculture and rural industry are flourishing. When you are using only if, you can put the only in the main clause, separated from the if. For example, instead of saying I will come only if he wants me, you can say I will only come if he wants me. He told them that disarmament was only possible if Britain changed her foreign policy. Another way of saying that one situation is necessary for another is to use a conditional clause consisting of if followed by the subject, a form of be, and a to-infinitive clause. In the main clause, you say what is necessary using must. It’s late, and if I am to get any sleep I must go. If you are to escape, you must leave me and go on alone. 8.39 If you want to say that one situation would not affect another, you can use even if. I would have married her even if she had been penniless. Even if you don’t get the job this time, there will be many exciting opportunities in the future. Even if is also used in concessive clauses. This is explained in paragraph 8.67. 8.40 If you want to say that a situation would not be affected by any of two or more things, you use whether. You put or between the different possibilities. Catching a frog can be a difficult business, whether you’re a human or a bird or a reptile. Whether you go to a launderette or do your washing at home, the routine is the same. If you want to say that what happens would not be affected by either of two opposite situations, you use a clause beginning with whether or not. Whether or not people have religious faith, they can believe in the power of love. I get an electrician to check all my electrical appliances every autumn, whether or not they are giving trouble. Or not can be put at the end of the clause. Whether I agreed or not, the search would take place. USAGENOTE8.41 When the verb in a whether-clause is be, the subjunctive is sometimes used. When you use the subjunctive, you use the base form of a verb rather than the third person singular. This is considered rather formal in British English, but is common in American English. Always report such behaviour to the nearest person in authority, whether it be a school teacher or a policeman, or anyone else. When the verb in a whether-clause is be and the subject is a personal pronoun such as they or it, you can omit be and the pronoun. For example, instead of saying All the villagers, whether they are young or old, help with the harvest, you can say All the villagers, whether young or old, help with the harvest. A fresh pepper, whether red or green, lasts about three weeks. They help people, whether tourists or students, to learn more of our past. 8.42 When you want to say that something is the case and that it does not matter which person, place, cause, method, or thing is involved, you use whoever, wherever, however, whatever, or whichever. Whoever wins this civil war, there will be little rejoicing at the victory. Wherever it is, you aren’t going. However it began, the battle would always develop into a large-scale conflict. Whatever and whichever are used either as determiners or pronouns. Whatever car you drive, keep fixing it and keep it forever. The deficit is extremely important this year, whatever they say. Whichever way you do it, it’s hard work. Whichever you decide, I’m sure it will be just fine. Another way of saying that it does not matter who or what is involved is to use no matter followed by who, where, how, what, or which. Most people, no matter who they are, seem to have at least one. Our aim is to recruit the best person for the job, no matter where they are from. No matter how I’m playing, I always get that special feeling. Purpose clauses: He did it in order to make her happy 8.43 When you want to talk about the purpose of an action, you use a purpose clause. Here is a list of the most common conjunctions used in purpose clauses: in order that in order to so so as to so that to typesofpurposeclause8.44 There are two kinds of purpose clause. Clauses containing a to-infinitive are the most common. They had to take some of his land in order to extend the churchyard. Farmers have put up barricades to prevent people moving on to their land. The subject of this type of purpose clause is always the same as the subject of the main clause. This type of purpose clause is explained in paragraphs 8.45 to 8.46. Other purpose clauses usually contain that. Be as clear and factual as possible in order that there may be no misunderstanding. This type of purpose clause is explained in paragraphs 8.47 to 8.48. to-infinitiveclauses8.45 To-infinitive purpose clauses usually begin with in order to or so as to. They were pushing in order to get to the front. We had to borrow money in order to buy the house. We fixed up a screen so as to let in the fresh air and keep out the flies. If you want to make one of these clauses negative, you put not in front of the to. Rose trod with care in order not to spread the dirt. When removing a stain, work from the edge inwards so as not to enlarge the area affected. 8.46 Some purpose clauses can simply be to-infinitive clauses. People would stroll down the path to admire the garden. The children sleep together to keep warm. To understand what is happening now, we need to think about what has been achieved. However, you cannot use a negative with one of these structures. You cannot say, for example, We keep the window shut not to let the flies in. You would have to say, We keep the window shut in order not to let the flies in. that-clauses8.47 Other purpose clauses usually begin with in order that, so that, or so. They usually contain a modal. If the verb in the main clause is in the present or in the present perfect, you usually use one of the modals can, may, will, or shall in the purpose clause. …people who are learning English in order that they can study a particular subject. If the verb in the main clause is in the past, you usually use could, might, should, or would in the purpose clause. A stranger had lifted Philip up on his shoulder so that he could see better. I bought six cows so that we would have some milk to sell. She wanted the meal ready at six so she could go out at eight. Ordinary verbs are occasionally used instead of modals, especially in negative purpose clauses. Make sure you get plenty of rest, so that you don’t fall asleep at work. So that is also used in result clauses. This use is explained in paragraphs 8.55 and 8.56. 8.48 In formal or old-fashioned English, lest is sometimes used at the beginning of a purpose clause to say what an action is intended to prevent. For example, They built a statue of him lest people should forget what he had done means the same as They built a statue of him so that people would not forget what he had done. He spoke in whispers lest the servants should hear him. In clauses beginning with lest, you use either the subjunctive or a modal. Reason clauses: … because I wanted to win 8.49 When you want to give the reason for something, you use a reason clause. Here is a list of the main conjunctions used in reason clauses: as because in case just in case since 8.50 If you are simply giving the reason for something, you use because, since, or as. I couldn’t be angry with him because I liked him too much. I didn’t know that she was married, since she rarely talked about herself. As we had plenty of time, we decided to go for a coffee. 8.51 You use in case or just in case when you are mentioning a possible future situation which is someone’s reason for doing something. In the reason clause, you use the present simple. Mr Woods, I am here just in case anything out of the ordinary happens. When you are talking about someone’s reason for doing something in the past, you use the past simple in the reason clause. He did not sit down in case his trousers got creased. 8.52 In that, inasmuch as, insofar as, and to the extent that are used to say why a statement you have just made is true. These are formal expressions. I’m in a difficult situation in that I have been offered two jobs and they both sound interesting. Censorship is ineffective inasmuch as it does not protect anyone. We are traditional insofar as we write traditional-style songs, but we try and write about modern issues. He feels himself to be dependent to the extent that he is not free to make his own decisions. Inasmuch as is sometimes written as In as much as, and insofar as is sometimes written as in so far as. 8.53 People sometimes use reason clauses beginning with for or seeing that. For means the same as because. Its use in reason clauses is now considered to be old-fashioned. I hesitate, for I am not quite sure of my facts. Seeing that means the same as since. It is used only in informal speech. Seeing that you’re the guest on this little trip, I won’t tell you what I think of your behaviour last night. Now and now that are used to say that a new situation is the reason for something. Clauses beginning with now or now that are dealt with as time clauses. They are explained in paragraph 8.18. Result clauses: I’ll drive you there so that you won’t be late 8.54 When you want to talk about the result of something, you use a result clause. Result clauses always come after the main clause. 8.55 Result clauses usually begin with so that. You can use so that simply to say what the result of an event or situation was. My suitcase had become damaged, so that the lid would not stay closed. A storm had brought the sea into the house, so that they had been forced to escape by a window. There’s a window above the bath so that when I’m relaxing here I can watch the sky. So, and so, and and can also be used. She was having great difficulty getting her car out, and so I had to move my car to let her out. He was shot in the chest and died. With these result clauses, you usually put a comma after the main clause. 8.56 You can also use so that to say that something is or was done in a particular way to achieve a desired result. For example, He fixed the bell so that it would ring when anyone came in means He fixed the bell in such a way that it would ring when anyone came in. Explain it so that a 10-year-old could understand it. They arranged things so that they never met. With these result clauses, you do not put a comma after the main clause. 8.57 So that is also used in purpose clauses. This use is explained in paragraph 8.47. USAGENOTE8.58 So and that are also used in a special kind of structure to say that a result happens because something has a quality to a particular extent, or because something is done in an extreme way. In these structures, so is used in front of an adjective or adverb. A that-clause is then added. The crowd was so large that it overflowed the auditorium. They were so surprised they didn’t try to stop him. He dressed so quickly that he put his boots on the wrong feet. She had fallen down so often that she was covered in mud. Sometimes as is used instead of that. As is followed by a to-infinitive clause. …small beaches of sand so white as to dazzle the eye. I hope that nobody was so stupid as to go around saying those things. 8.59 So and that can also be used in this way with many, few, much, and little. We found so much to talk about that it was late at night when we remembered the time. There were so many children you could hardly get in the room. USAGENOTE8.60 When the verb in the main clause is be or when an auxiliary is used, the normal order of words is often changed for greater emphasis. So is put at the beginning of the sentence, followed by the adjective, adverb, or noun. Be or the auxiliary is placed in front of the subject. For example, instead of saying The room was so tiny that you could not get a bed into it, you can say So tiny was the room that you could not get a bed into it. So successful have they been that they are moving to Bond Street. So rapid is the rate of progress that advance seems to be following advance on almost a monthly basis. 8.61 Such and that are also used to say that a result happens because something has a quality to a particular extent. You put such in front of a noun, and then add a that-clause. If the noun is a singular countable noun, you put a or an in front of it. I slapped her hand and she got such a shock that she dropped the bag. She was in such pain that she almost collapsed. These birds have such small wings that they cannot get into the air. 8.62 Such is sometimes used in a similar structure as an adjective with the meaning so great. The that-clause goes immediately after it. The extent of the disaster was such that the local authorities were quite unable to cope. Sometimes such is put at the beginning of a sentence, followed by be, a noun phrase, and the that-clause. For example, instead of saying Her beauty was such that they could only stare, you can say Such was her beauty that they could only stare. Such is the power of suggestion that within a very few minutes she fell asleep. 8.63 You can also use such as an adjective to say that a result is obtained by something being of a particular kind. Such is followed by a that-clause or by as and a to-infinitive clause. The dangers are such that an organized tour is a more sensible option. Conditions in prison should be such as to lessen the chances of prisoners reoffending. You can use the expression in such a way to say that a result is obtained by something being done in a particular way. It is followed by a that-clause or by as and a to-infinitive clause. She had been taught to behave in such a way that her parents would have as quiet a life as possible. Is it right that this high tax should be spent in such a way as to give benefit mainly to the motorist? 8.64 You use otherwise, else, or or else to say that a result of something not happening or not being the case would be that something else would happen or be the case. For example, Give me back my money, otherwise I’ll ring the police means If you don’t give me back my money, I’ll ring the police. I want a house I’ll like, otherwise I’ll get depressed. I must have done something wrong, or else they wouldn’t have kept me here. Concessive clauses: I love books, although I don’t read much 8.65 Sometimes you want to make two statements, one of which contrasts with the other or makes it seem surprising. You can put both statements into one sentence by using a concessive clause. Here is a list of conjunctions used in concessive clauses: although despite even if even though except that in spite of much as not that though whereas while whilst contrast8.66 If you simply want to contrast two statements, you use although, though, even though, or while. I used to read a lot although I don’t get much time for books now. Though he has lived for years in London, he writes in German. I used to love listening to her, even though I couldn’t understand what she said. While I did well in class, I was a poor performer at games. The fairly formal words whilst and whereas can also be used. Raspberries have a hairy surface whilst blackberries have a shiny skin. To every child, adult approval means love, whereas disapproval can cause strong feelings of rejection. Whilst is not used in American English. 8.67 If you want to say that something which is probably true does not affect the truth of something else, you use even if. All this is part of modern commercial life (even if it is an essential activity). He’s beginning to be a different person, even if he doesn’t realize it. Even if is also used in conditional clauses. This use is explained in paragraph 8.39. 8.68 You can use not that instead of using although and a negative. For example, instead of saying I have decided to leave, although no one will miss me, you can say I have decided to leave, not that anyone will miss me. Clauses beginning with not that always go after a main clause. He’s got a new girlfriend, not that I care. I think I looked very chic for the party, not that anyone noticed. exceptions8.69 If you want to mention an exception to a statement that you have just made, you use except that. She treats her daughter the same as her younger boy except that she takes her several times a week to a special clinic. Nobody said a thing except that one or two asked me if I was better. This kind of clause is sometimes called an exception clause. USAGENOTE8.70 When a clause beginning with though ends with a linking verb like be or seem and a noun or an adjective (= a complement), the complement can be brought forward to the beginning of the clause. For example, instead of saying Though he was tired, he insisted on coming to the meeting, you can say Tired though he was, he insisted on coming to the meeting. Tempting though it may be to discuss this point, it is not really relevant. I had to accept the fact, improbable though it was. Astute business man though he was, Philip was capable of making mistakes. When the complement is an adjective, you can use as instead of though. Stupid as it sounds, I believed her. When a clause beginning with though ends with an adverb, you can often put the adverb at the beginning of the clause. Some members of staff couldn’t handle Murray’s condition, hard though they tried. When you are talking about a strong feeling or desire, you can use much as instead of although. For example, instead of saying Although I like Venice, I couldn’t live there you can say Much as I like Venice, I couldn’t live there. Much as he admired her, he had no wish to marry her. -ingparticipleclauses8.71 Although, though, while, and whilst are sometimes used in -ing participle clauses. For example, instead of saying While he liked cats, he never let them come into his house, you can say While liking cats, he never let them come into his house. While accepting the importance of freedom of speech, I believe it must be exercised with responsibility. Despite and in spite of can also be used at the beginning of -ing participle clauses. Despite working hard, I failed my exams means Although I worked hard, I failed my exams. Sensible, interested parents still play a big part in their children’s lives, despite working long hours. We had two more years of profit in spite of paying higher wages than the previous owner. 8.72 Although, though, while, and whilst are also used in front of noun, adjective, and adverb phrases. For example, instead of saying Although she was fond of Gregory, she did not love him, you can say Although fond of Gregory, she did not love him. Similarly, instead of saying They agreed to his proposal, though they had many reservations, you can say They agreed to his proposal, though with many reservations. It was an unequal marriage, although a stable and long-lasting one. Though not very attractive physically, she possessed a sense of humour. They had followed her suggestion, though without much enthusiasm. Even if, if, and albeit can also be used in this way. Albeit is a formal word. Other species have cognitive abilities, even if not as developed as our own. …a pleasant, if unexciting, novel. Like mercury, lead affects the brain, albeit in different ways. Place clauses: Stay where you are 8.73 Sometimes, when you want to talk about the location or position of something, you need to use a clause. The kind of clause you use is called a place clause. 8.74 Place clauses usually begin with where. He said he was happy where he was. He left it where it lay. Stay where you are. Where is also used in relative clauses. This use is explained in paragraphs 8.104 to 8.106. 8.75 In formal or literary English, where-clauses are sometimes put in front of a main clause. Where Kate had stood last night, Maureen now stood. Where the pink cliffs rose out of the ground there were often narrow tracks winding upwards. He shouldn’t have left her alone, just as if she was someone of no importance at all. 8.82 You can also use as if and as though in clauses that begin with a to-infinitive or a participle. For a few moments, he sat as if stunned. He ran off to the house as if escaping. He shook his head as though dazzled by his own vision. You can also use as if and as though in front of adjectives and prepositional phrases. One must row steadily onwards as if intent on one’s own business. He shivered as though with cold. Relative clauses 8.83 When you mention someone or something in a sentence, you often want to give further information about them. One way to do this is to use a relative clause. You put a relative clause immediately after the noun that refers to the person, thing, or group you are talking about. The man who came into the room was small and slender. Opposite is St. Paul’s Church, where you can hear some lovely music. Relative clauses have a similar function to adjectives, and they are sometimes called adjectival clauses. Nominal relative clauses, which have a similar function to noun phrases, are explained in paragraphs 8.112 to 8.116. relativepronouns8.84 Many relative clauses begin with a relative pronoun. The relative pronoun usually acts as the subject or object of the verb in the relative clause. He is the only person who might be able to help. Most of them have a job, which they take both for the money and the company. Here is a list of the most common relative pronouns: that which who whom whose Relative pronouns do not have masculine, feminine, or plural forms. The same pronoun can be used to refer to a man, a woman, or a group of people. She didn’t recognize the man who had spoken. I met a girl who knew Mrs Townsend. There are many people who find this intolerable. Some relative clauses do not have a relative pronoun. Nearly all the people I used to know have gone. This is explained in paragraphs 8.90, 8.91, and 8.96. typesofrelativeclause8.85 There are two types of relative clause. Some relative clauses explain which person or thing you are talking about. For example, if you say I met the woman, it might not be clear who you mean, so you might say, I met the woman who lives next door. In this sentence, who lives next door is called a defining relative clause. Shortly after the shooting, the man who had done it was arrested. Mooresville is the town that John Dillinger came from. Other relative clauses give further information that is not needed to identify the person, thing, or group you are talking about. For example, if you say I saw Miley Cyrus, it is clear who you mean. But you might want to add more information about Miley Cyrus, so you might say, for example, I saw Miley Cyrus, who was staying at the hotel opposite. In this sentence, who was staying at the hotel opposite is called a non-defining relative clause. He was waving to the girl, who was running along the platform. He walked down to Broadway, the main street of the town, which ran parallel to the river. This type of relative clause is used mainly in writing rather than speech. Note that you cannot begin a non-defining relative clause with that. punctuation8.86 A relative clause that simply gives extra information usually has a comma in front of it and a comma after it, unless it is at the end of a sentence, in which case you just put a full stop. Dashes are sometimes used instead of commas. My son, who is four, loves Spiderman. You never put a comma or a dash in front of a defining relative clause. The woman who owns this cabin will come back in the autumn. useafterpronouns8.87 Relative clauses that distinguish one noun from all others can be used after some pronouns. They are used after indefinite pronouns such as someone, anyone, and everything. This is something that I’m very proud of. In theory anyone who lives or works in the area may be at risk. We want to thank everyone who supported us through this. They are sometimes used after some, many, much, several, all, or those. Like many who met him I was soon in love. …the feelings of those who have suffered from the effects of crime. They can also be used after personal pronouns, but only in formal or old-fashioned English. He who is not for reform is against it. …we who are supposed to be so good at writing. -ingparticipleclauses8.88 Relative clauses can sometimes be reduced to -ing participle clauses. For example, instead of saying Give it to the man who is wearing the sunglasses, you can say Give it to the man wearing the sunglasses. Similarly, instead of saying The bride, who was smiling happily, chatted to the guests, you can say The bride, smiling happily, chatted to the guests. These uses are explained in paragraphs 8.129 to 8.145. See also paragraphs 2.300 and 2.301. Using relative pronouns in defining clauses 8.89 The following paragraphs explain which pronouns you use in defining relative clauses. referringtopeople8.90 When you are referring to a person or group of people, you use who or that as the subject of a defining clause. Who is more common than that. The man who employed me was called Tom. …the people who live in the cottage. …somebody who is really ill. …the man that made it. You use who, that, or whom as the object of a defining clause, or you do not use a pronoun at all. …someone who I haven’t seen for a long time. …a woman that I dislike. …distant relatives whom he had never seen. …a man I know. You use that as the complement of a defining clause, or you do not use a pronoun. …the distinguished actress that she later became. Little is known about the kind of person she was. After a superlative, you do not usually use a pronoun. He was the cleverest man I ever knew. …the best thing I ever did. For more information about superlatives see paragraphs 2.112 to 2.122. referringtothings8.91 When you are referring to a thing or group of things, you use which or that as the subject of a defining clause. That is much more common than which in American English. …pasta which came from Milan. We need to understand the things which are important to people. There are a lot of things that are wrong. You use which or that as the object of a defining clause, or you do not use a pronoun. …shells which my sister had collected. …the oxygen that it needs. …one of the things I’ll never forget. After much or all, you use that. You do not use which. There was not much that the military men could do. Happiness is all that matters. Using relative pronouns in non-defining clauses 8.92 The following paragraphs explain which pronouns you use in non-defining relative clauses. These clauses cannot be used without a relative pronoun. referringtopeople8.93 When you are referring to a person or group of people, you use who as the subject of a non-defining clause. Heath Robinson, who died in 1944, was a graphic artist and cartoonist. The horse’s rider, who has not been named, was too distressed to talk to police. You use who or whom as the object of a non-defining clause. Brian, who I do not like, had no idea how to behave properly. He then became involved in a row with the party chairman, whom he accused of lying. referringtothingsreferringtothings8.94 When you are referring to a thing or group of things, you use which as the subject or object of a non-defining clause. The treatment, which is being tried by researchers, has helped a large number of patients. The company, which has about 160 shops, is in financial trouble. He was a man of considerable wealth, which he spent on his experiments. …this offer, which few can resist. Using relative pronouns with prepositions 8.95 A relative pronoun can be the object of a preposition. Usually the preposition goes towards the end of the clause, and not in front of the pronoun. …the job which I’d been training for. …the universe that we live in. …the woman who Muller left his money to. nopronoun8.96 Often, in ordinary speech, no pronoun is used. Angela was the only person I could talk to. …that place I used to go to last term. That’s all we have time for this week. indirectobjects8.97 When a relative pronoun is the indirect object of a verb, you use to or for. For example, you say the man that she wrote the letter to, not the man that she wrote the letter. …pieces of work that we give a mark to. You also use to or for when there is no relative pronoun. …the girl I sang the song for. formaluse8.98 In formal English, the preposition can go at the beginning of a clause in front of whom or which. These are the people to whom Catherine was referring. …a woman friend with whom Rose used to go for walks. …questions to which there were no answers. Note however that you cannot put the preposition at the beginning of a clause in front of who or that. phrasalverbs8.99 If the verb in a relative clause is a phrasal verb ending with a preposition, you cannot move the preposition to the beginning of the clause. …all the things I’ve had to put up with. …the kind of life he was looking forward to. There are other problems, which I don’t propose to go into at the moment. USAGENOTE8.100 Words such as some, many, and most can be put in front of of whom or of which at the beginning of a non-defining relative clause. At the school we were greeted by the teachers, most of whom were women. It is a language shared by several quite diverse cultures, each of which uses it differently. Numbers can be put before or after of whom. They act mostly on suggestions from present members (four of whom are women). There were 80 patients, of whom only one died. Using whose 8.101 If you want to talk about something relating to the person, thing, or group you are talking about, you use a relative clause beginning with whose and a noun or noun phrase. For example, instead of saying I am writing a letter to Nigel. His father is ill, you can say I am writing a letter to Nigel, whose father is ill. Whose can be used in defining or non-defining clauses. …workers whose bargaining power is weak. …anyone whose credit card is stolen. She asked friends whose opinion she respected. …a country whose population was growing. The man, whose identity was not released, was attacked at 10 p.m. last night. The noun after whose can be the subject or object of the verb in the clause, or it can be the object of a preposition. If it is the object of a preposition, the preposition can come at the beginning or end of the clause. …the governments in whose territories they operate. …writers whose company he did not care for. 8.102 In written English, of which and of whom are sometimes used instead of whose. You put these expressions after a noun phrase beginning with the. For example, instead of writing a town whose inhabitants speak French, you can write a town the inhabitants of which speak French. …a competition the results of which will be announced today. I travelled in a lorry the back of which the owner had loaded with yams. Using other relative pronouns 8.103 Some other words and expressions can be used as relative pronouns. non-definingclauses8.104 When and where are used in non-defining clauses (that is, clauses that simply add extra information). I want to see you at 12 o’clock, when you go to your lunch. My favourite holiday was in 2009, when I went to Jamaica. He came from Brighton, where Lisa had once spent a holiday. She took them up the stairs to the art room, where the brushes and paints had been set out. definingclauses8.105 When and where can also be used in defining clauses (that is, clauses that distinguish one noun from all others), but only when the clause is preceded by a particular kind of noun. When-clauses must be preceded by the word time or by the name of a period of time such as day or year. There was a time when she thought they were wonderful. This is the year when the profits should start. Where-clauses must be preceded by the word place or by the name of a kind of place such as room or street. …the place where they work. …the room where I did my homework. …the street where my grandmother had lived. Note that place names such as China are proper nouns and so do not need to have defining relative clauses after them. 8.106 Where can also be used in defining clauses after words such as circumstances, point, situation and stage. Increasing poverty has led to a situation where the poorest cannot afford to have children. In time we reached a stage where we had more male readers than female ones. There comes a point where it’s impossible to answer. Compensation was sometimes granted even in circumstances where no injury had occurred. 8.107 Why is used in defining clauses after the word reason. That is a major reason why they were such poor countries. Whereby is used in defining clauses after words such as arrangement and system. …the new system whereby everyone pays a fixed amount. Counselling is a process whereby the person concerned can learn to manage the emotional realities that face them. USAGENOTE8.108 Other expressions can be used in defining clauses in place of when, where, why, and whereby. After time you can use at which instead of when. …the time at which the original mineral was formed. After place, room, street, and words such as year and month, you can use in which instead of where or when. …the place in which they found themselves. …the room in which the meeting would be held. …the year in which Lloyd George lost power. After day you can use on which instead of when. Sunday was the day on which we were expected to spend some time with my father. After reason you can use that or no pronoun instead of why. …the reason that non-violence is considered to be a virtue. That’s the reason I’m checking it now. After words such as situation, stage, arrangement, or system you can use in which instead of where or whereby. …a situation in which there’s a real political vacuum. Additional points about non-defining relative clauses 8.109 In written English, you can use a non-defining clause, that is, a clause that simply gives extra information, to say that one event happened after another. For example, instead of saying I gave the book to George. George then gave it to Mary, you can say I gave the book to George, who gave it to Mary. I sold my car to a garage, who sold it to a customer at twice the price. The hot water ran on to the ice, which promptly melted. Later he went to New Zealand, where he became a teacher. commentingonafact8.110 You can use a non-defining clause beginning with which to say something about the whole situation described in a main clause, rather than about someone or something mentioned in it. These computers need only tiny amounts of power, which means that they will run on small batteries. I never met Brando again, which was a pity. Before the exam she was a little tense, which was understandable. commentingonatimeorsituation8.111 When you want to add something to what you have said, you sometimes use a non-defining clause beginning with a preposition, which, and a noun, to add extra information. The noun is often a word like time or point, or a very general word for a situation like case or event. They remain in the pouch for some seven weeks, by which time they are about 10 cm long. I was told my work was not good enough, at which point I decided to get another job. Sometimes you may feel too weak to cope with things, in which case do them as soon as it is convenient. Nominal relative clauses: What you need is … 8.112 When it is difficult to refer to something by using a noun phrase, you can sometimes use a special type of relative clause called a nominal relative clause. What he really needs is a nice cup of tea. Whatever she does will affect the whole family. 8.113 Nominal relative clauses that begin with what can be used. What can mean either the thing that or the things that. What he said was perfectly true. They did not like what he wrote. I believe that is a very good account of what happened. I’m what’s generally called a dustman. People often use a what-clause in front of is or was to say what kind of thing they are about to mention. What I need is a lawyer. What you have to do is to choose five companies to invest in. These structures are explained in paragraphs 9.28 to 9.30. For another use of what in nominal relative clauses see paragraph 8.116. 8.114 Nominal relative clauses that begin with where are usually used after a preposition or after the verb be. Where means the place where. I crossed the room to where she was sitting. He lives two streets down from where Mr Sutton works. This is where I crashed the car. 8.115 Nominal relative clauses beginning with whatever, whoever, or whichever are used to refer to something or someone that is unknown or indefinite. Whatever is used only to refer to things. Whoever is used to refer to people. Whichever is used to refer to either things or people. Whatever, whoever, and whichever can be used as pronouns. Whichever is often followed by of. I’ll do whatever you want. I want to do whatever I can to help them. You’ll need written permission from whoever is in charge. People will choose whichever of these systems they find suits them best. Whatever and whichever can also be used as determiners. She had had to rely on whatever books were lying around there. Choose whichever one of the three methods you fancy. For more information about whatever, whoever, and whichever see paragraph 8.42. 8.116 What can be used with the same meaning as whatever, both as a pronoun and a determiner. Do what you like. We give what help we can. The main use of what in nominal relative clauses is explained in paragraph 8.113. Nominal that-clauses 8.117 A nominal that-clause is a type of subordinate clause that functions like a noun, and is introduced by that. When this type of clause is used to say 8.145 Defining clauses can be used after indefinite pronouns such as anyone. Anyone following this advice could get in trouble. Ask anybody nearing the age of retirement what they think. Other structures used like non-finite clauses 8.146 Phrases that do not contain a verb are sometimes used in writing in a similar way to non-finite clauses. 8.147 In writing, you can add a phrase containing one or more adjectives to a sentence. This is another way of making two statements in one sentence. For example, instead of writing We were tired and hungry. We reached the farm, you could write Tired and hungry, we reached the farm. Surprised at my reaction, she tried to console me. Much discouraged, I moved on to Philadelphia. The boy nodded, pale and scared. He knocked at the door, sick with fear. Of course, said Alison, astonished. 8.148 In a similar way, you can use a phrase to describe something that is connected with the subject of a sentence. The phrase consists of a noun, followed by an adjective, an adverbial, or another noun. For example, instead of writing He came into the room. His hat was in his hand, you could write He came into the room, his hat in his hand. What do you mean by that? said Hugh, his face pale. She stood very straight, her body absolutely stiff with fury. He was waiting, drumming with his fingers, his eyes on his napkin. With is sometimes added at the beginning of a phrase. She walked on, with her eyes straight ahead. It was a hot, calm day, with every object visible for miles. Linking words, phrases, and clauses together 8.149 When you say or write something, you often want to put together two or more clauses of equal importance. You do this by using a coordinating conjunction. Anna had to go into town and she wanted to go to Bride Street. I asked if I could borrow her bicycle but she refused. He was a great player, yet he never played for Ireland. Here is a list of the most common coordinating conjunctions: and but nor or then yet Coordinating conjunctions are also used to link words and phrases. The boys shouted and rushed forward. …domestic animals such as dogs and cats. Her manner was hurried yet polite. She spoke slowly but firmly. Sometimes coordinating conjunctions are used together. The software is quite sophisticated and yet easy to use. Eric moaned something and then lay still. The linking of clauses, words, or phrases using coordinating conjunctions is called coordination. Coordinating conjunctions are sometimes called coordinators. 8.150 The different uses of coordinating conjunctions are explained in the following paragraphs: clauses paragraphs 8.151 to 8.163 paragraphs 8.164 to 8.170 paragraphs 8.171 to 8.179 paragraphs 8.180 to 8.189 paragraphs 8.190 to 8.193 verbs noun phrases adjectives and adverbs other words and phrases Ways of emphasizing coordinating conjunctions are described in paragraphs 8.194 to 8.199. The linking of more than two clauses, words, or phrases is explained in paragraphs 8.200 and 8.201. Linking clauses 8.151 You can use a coordinating conjunction to link clauses that have the same subject, or clauses that have different subjects. omittingwordsinthesecondclause8.152 When you link clauses that have the same subject, you do not always need to repeat the subject in the second clause. If the conjunction is and, or, or then, you do not usually repeat the subject. I picked up the glass and raised it to my lips. It’s a long time since you’ve bought them a drink or talked to them. When she recognized Morris she went pale, then blushed. If the conjunction is but, so, or yet, it is usual to repeat the subject. I try and see it their way, but I can’t. I had no car, so I hired one for the journey. He lost the fight, yet somehow he emerged with his dignity. When you link clauses that have different subjects but that have some common elements, you do not need to repeat all the elements in the second clause. For example, instead of saying Some of them went to one restaurant and some of them went to the other restaurant, you can say Some of them went to one restaurant and some to the other. One soldier was killed and another wounded. One side was painted black and the other white. functionsofcoordinatingconjunctions8.153 A coordinating conjunction can be used simply to link clauses, or it can be used in addition to indicate a relationship between them. These uses are explained in the following paragraphs. relatedfactsrelatedfacts8.154 If you simply want to mention two related facts, you use and. He has been successful in Hollywood and has worked with such directors as Mike Leigh and Richard Attenborough. The company will not close and will continue to operate from Belfast. He gained a B in English and now plans to study languages. You also use and to show that two things happened or are happening at the same time. I sat and watched him. Other uses of and are explained in the following paragraphs. sequence8.155 If you use and between two clauses that describe events, you are saying that the event described in the first clause happens or happened before the event described in the second one. She was born in Budapest and raised in Manhattan. He opened the car door and got out. Then can be used in the same way, but it is less common. We finished our drinks then left. twonegativefacts8.156 When you want to link two negative clauses, you usually use and. When his contract ended he did not return home and he has not been there since 1979. However, you can use or when the clauses have the same subject and the same auxiliaries. In the second clause, you omit the subject, the auxiliaries, and not. For example, instead of saying She doesn’t eat meat and she doesn’t eat fish, you can say She doesn’t eat meat or fish. We will not damage or destroy the samples. He didn’t yell or scream. You can also link negative clauses by using and neither, and nor, or nor. You put be or the auxiliary at the beginning of the second clause, in front of the subject. For example, instead of saying My sister doesn’t like him, and I don’t like him, you can say My sister doesn’t like him, and neither do I. I was not happy and neither were they. I could not afford to eat in restaurants and nor could anyone else I knew. These people are not crazy, nor are they fools. But neither and but nor can also be used. This isn’t a great movie, but neither is it rubbish. I don’t want to marry him but nor do I want anyone else to. When you use and to link two negative statements, you can put either after the second statement. I hadn’t been to a rock festival before and Mike hadn’t either. Electricity didn’t come into Blackball Farm until recently and they hadn’t any hot water either. For emphasis, you can join two negative clauses by using neither and nor. This use is explained in paragraph 8.198. contrast8.157 When you are adding a contrasting fact, you usually use but. I’m only 63, but I feel a hundred. It costs quite a lot but it’s worth it. I’ve had a very pleasant two years, but I can’t wait to get back to the city. If you want to add a fact that contrasts strongly with what you have just said, you use yet or and yet. Everything around him was destroyed, yet the minister escaped without a scratch. I want to leave, and yet I feel I should to stay. You usually put a comma in front of but, yet, or and yet. alternatives8.158 When you want to mention two alternatives, you use or. We could take a picnic or we could find a restaurant when we’re out. Did he jump, or was he pushed? USAGENOTE8.159 When you are giving advice, you sometimes want to tell someone what will happen if they do a particular thing. You do this by using an imperative clause, followed by and and a clause containing a verb in a form that expresses future time. For example, instead of saying If you go by train, you’ll get there quicker, you can say Go by train and you’ll get there quicker. Do as you are told and you’ll be alright. You speak to me again like that and you’re going to be in serious trouble. When you are giving advice, a warning, or an order, you sometimes want to tell someone what will happen if they do not do what you say. You do this by using an imperative clause, followed by or and a clause containing a verb in a form that expresses future time. For example, instead of saying Go away! If you don’t go away, I’ll scream, you can say Go away, or I’ll scream. Hurry up, or you’re going to be late for school. Don’t fight or you’ll get hurt. USAGENOTE8.160 In writing, you can sometimes begin a sentence with a coordinating conjunction. You do this to make the sentence seem more dramatic or forceful. Some people think this use is incorrect. The villagers had become accustomed to minor earth tremors. But everyone knew that something unusual had woken them on Monday. Do you think there is something wrong with her? Or do you just not like her? Go now. And close that door. USAGENOTE8.161 Sometimes, in writing, two clauses can be made into one sentence without a coordinating conjunction being used. Instead, a semicolon or a dash is put between the clauses. This is a way of expressing two statements in one sentence when no particular coordinating conjunction seems appropriate. The neighbours drove by; they couldn’t bear to look. I couldn’t say thank you–those words were far too small for someone who had risked her life to save mine. non-finiteclauses8.162 Coordinating conjunctions can be used to link non-finite clauses. To-infinitive clauses can be linked by and or or. We need to persuade drivers to leave their cars at home and to use the train instead. She may decide to remarry or to live with one of her sisters. Sometimes the second to is omitted. They tried to clear the road and remove discarded objects. When the second clause is negative, you can use not instead of and not. I am paid to treat people, not to interrogate them. Clauses beginning with a participle can be linked by and or or. She lay on the bed gazing at the child and smiling at him. You may be more comfortable wearing a cotton dress or shirt or sleeping under a cotton blanket. However, if the first clause begins with standing, sitting, or lying, you do not usually put and between the clauses. Inside were two lines of old people sitting facing each other. 8.163 For information on how to coordinate more than two clauses, see paragraph 8.200. Linking verbs together 8.164 When you are talking about two actions performed by the same person, thing, or group, you can use a coordinating conjunction to link two verbs. intransitiveverbsintransitiveverbs8.165 Coordinating conjunctions can be used to link intransitive verbs. Mostly, they just sat and chatted. We both shrugged and laughed. transitiveverbs8.166 When you are describing actions involving the same subject and object, you can link two transitive verbs. You put the object after the second verb only. For example, instead of saying He swept the floor and polished the floor, you say He swept and polished the floor. Wash and trim the leeks. Similarly, instead of saying They walk to work or cycle to work, you can say They walk or cycle to work. I shouted and waved at them. leavingouttheauxiliary8.167 When you are linking verb phrases that contain the same auxiliary, you do not need to repeat the auxiliary in the second clause. Someone may be killed or seriously injured. Now he is praised rather than criticized. He knew a lot about horses, having lived and worked with them all his life. emphasizingrepetitionorduration8.168 If you want to say that someone does something repeatedly or for a long time, you can use and to link two identical verbs. They laughed and laughed. He tried and tried, but in the end he had to give up. USAGENOTE8.169 In informal speech, and is often used between try and another verb. For example, someone might say I’ll try and get a newspaper. However, this means the same as I’ll try to get a newspaper. For more information about this use see paragraph 3.200. 8.170 For information on how to coordinate more than two verbs, see paragraph 8.200. Linking noun phrases 8.171 When you are talking about two people or things, you can use a coordinating conjunction to link two noun phrases. 8.172 In simple statements about two people or things, you use and. There were men and women working in the fields. I’ll give you a nice cup of tea and a biscuit. …a friendship between a boy and a girl. Instead of and not, you use not with a comma in front of it. I prefer romantic comedies, not action movies. If both people or things are the object of the verb in a negative sentence, you use or. We didn’t play cricket or football. alternatives8.173 When you are giving alternatives, you use or. Serve fruit or cheese afterwards. Do you have any brothers or sisters? omittingdeterminers8.174 When you refer to two people or things using and or or, you usually repeat the determiner. He was holding a suitcase and a birdcage. However, if the people or things are closely associated in some way, you do not need to repeat the determiner. My mother and father worked hard. The jacket and skirt were skilfully designed. …a man in a suit and tie. Sometimes both determiners are omitted. Mother and baby are doing well. All this had of course been discussed between husband and wife. referringtoonepersonorthing8.175 You can sometimes use noun phrases linked by and to refer to just one person or thing. He’s a racist and a sexist. …the novelist and playwright, Somerset Maugham. omittingadjectives8.176 When you are linking two nouns, an adjective in front of the first noun usually applies to both nouns. …the young men and women of America. …a house crammed with beautiful furniture and china. verbagreement8.177 When the subject of a clause consists of two or more nouns linked by and, you use a plural verb. My mother and father are ill. Time, money and effort were needed. However, you do not use a plural verb if the nouns refer to the same person or thing. The writer and filmmaker Michael Hey disagrees. You also do not use a plural verb with uncountable nouns preceded by all, or with singular countable nouns preceded by each or every. All this effort and sacrifice has not helped to alleviate poverty. It became necessary to involve every man, woman and child who was willing to help. When you link two or more nouns with or, you use a plural verb after plural nouns, and a singular verb after singular nouns or uncountable nouns. One generation’s problems or successes are passed to the next. Can you say No to a friend or relative who wants to insist? When you link two or more nouns with or, and the nouns would take different verb forms if they were used alone, a plural verb is generally used. It’s fine if your parents or brother want to come. linkingpronounstogether8.178 You can put and, or, or not between a pronoun and a noun, or between two pronouns. Howard and I are planning a party. She and I have a very good relationship. Do you or your partner speak German? I’m talking to you, not her. When you say something about yourself and someone else, you usually put the pronoun or noun referring to the other person first, and the pronoun referring to yourself second. My sister and I lived totally different kinds of lives. You and I must have a talk together. …a difference of opinion between John and me. The first people to hear were the Foreign Secretary and myself. 8.179 For information on how to coordinate more than two noun phrases, see paragraph 8.200. Linking adjectives and adverbs 8.180 When you use two adjectives to describe someone or something, you sometimes put a conjunction between them. This is explained in the following paragraphs 8.181 to 8.187. Conjunctions are also sometimes placed between adverbs. This is explained in paragraph 8.188. qualitativeadjectives8.181 When you put two qualitative adjectives in front of a noun, you put and or a comma between the adjectives. …an intelligent and ambitious woman. …an intelligent, generous man. colouradjectives8.182 When you put two colour adjectives in front of a noun, you put and between them. …a black and white swimming suit. classifyingadjectives8.183 When you put two classifying adjectives in front of a noun, you have to decide whether the adjectives relate to the same system of classification or to different systems. For example, geographical and geological relate to the same system; British and industrial relate to different systems. When you put two classifying adjectives in front of a noun, and the adjectives relate to the same classifying system, you put and between them. …a social and educational dilemma. When the adjectives relate to different classifying systems, you do not put and between them, or use a comma. …the French classical pianists Katia and Marielle Labeque. …medieval Muslim philosophers. …a square wooden table. …American agricultural exports. differenttypesofadjective8.184 When you put two adjectives of different types in front of a noun, for example a qualitative adjective and a classifying adjective, you do not put and between them or use a comma. …a large circular pool of water. …a beautiful pink suit. …rapid technological advance. adjectiveswithpluralnouns8.185 When you put two adjectives in front of a plural noun in order to talk about two groups of things that have different or opposite qualities, you put and between the adjectives. …business people from large and small companies. …European and American traditions. adjectivesafterverbs8.186 When you use two adjectives after a linking verb, you put and between them. Mrs Scott’s house was large and imposing. The room was large and square. On this point we can be clear and precise. usingotherconjunctions8.187 You can also put but, yet, or or between adjectives. When you link contrasting adjectives, you put but or yet between them. …a small but comfortable hotel. We are poor but happy. …a firm yet gentle hand. When you want to say that either of two adjectives could apply, or to ask which adjective applies, you use or. You can use red or black paint. Call me if you feel lonely or bored. Is this good or bad? If you want to say that neither of two adjectives applies, you use or in a negative sentence. He was not exciting or good-looking. Another way of saying that neither of two adjectives applies is to put neither in front of the first one and nor in front of the second one. He is neither young nor handsome. Their diet is neither healthy nor varied. linkingadverbstogether8.188 You can put and between adverbs. Mary was breathing quietly and evenly. We have to keep airports running smoothly and efficiently. They walk up and down, smiling. When you link contrasting adverbs, you put but or yet between them. Quickly but silently she darted out of the cell. If you want to say that neither of two adverbs applies, you use a negative sentence with or between the adverbs, or you put neither in front of the first adverb and nor in front of the second one. Giving birth does not happen easily or painlessly. The story ends neither happily nor unhappily. 8.189 For information on how to coordinate more than two adjectives, see paragraph 8.201. Linking other words and phrases 8.190 Coordinating conjunctions can also be used to link prepositions, prepositional phrases, modifiers, and determiners. linkingprepositionstogether8.191 You can use and to link prepositions that apply to the same noun. We see them on their way to and from school. You should take the tablets during and after your visit. linkingprepositionalphrasestogether8.192 You can use and to link prepositional phrases when you are describing similar actions, situations, or things. They walked across the lawn and down the garden path. They had crumbs around their mouths and under their chins. However, if the phrases describe the same action, situation, or thing, you do not put and between them. Her husband was hit over the head with a mallet. They walked down the drive between the chestnut trees. …a man of about forty with wide staring eyes. linkingmodifiersanddeterminerstogether8.193 You can use and or or to link modifiers. …the largest fridge and freezer manufacturer in Germany. This would not apply to a coal or oil supplier. You can use or to link the determiners his and her. Your child’s school will play an important part in shaping the rest of his or her life. Emphasizing coordinating conjunctions 8.194 When you are using coordinating conjunctions, you sometimes want to emphasize that what you are saying applies to both the words or phrases linked by the conjunction. You usually do this by putting a word such as both or neither in front of the first word or phrase. 8.195 When you are using and, the most common way of emphasizing that what you are saying applies to two phrases is to put both in front of the first phrase. By that time both Robin and Drew were overseas. They feel both anxiety and joy. These headlines both mystified and infuriated him. Investment continues both at home and abroad. The medicine is both expensive and in great demand. Another way is to use and also instead of and. Wilkins drove racing cars himself and also raced powerboats. The job of the library is to get books to people and also to get information to them. 8.196 For stronger emphasis, you can put not only or not just in front of the first word or phrase, and but or but also between the two words or phrases. The team is playing really well, not only in England but now in Europe. Employers need to think more seriously not only of attracting staff but of keeping them. 8.197 When you are using or, the most common way of emphasizing that what you are saying applies to two words or phrases is to put either in front of the first word or phrase. Sentences can be either true or false. You can either buy a special insecticide or get help from an expert. Either Margaret or John should certainly have come to see me by now. Either we raise money from outside or we close part of the museum. When you are linking clauses in this way, you can use or else, instead of or. They should either formally charge the men or else let them go. 8.198 If you want to emphasize that a negative statement applies to two words or phrases, you put neither in front of the first word or phrase and nor in front of the second word or phrase. For example, instead of saying The girl did not speak or look up, you say The girl neither spoke nor looked up. The thought neither upset nor delighted her. She had neither received nor read the letter. Neither Margaret nor John was there. Note that you use a singular verb after singular noun phrases and a plural verb after plural noun phrases. Neither Belinda nor anyone else was going to speak. Neither city councils nor wealthy manufacturers have much need of painters or sculptors. 8.199 Sometimes you want to draw attention to an element of a sentence by contrasting it with something different. One way to do this is to link the two elements by putting but between them. You put not in front of the first element. I wasn’t smiling, not because I was angry but because it was painful to move my face. I felt not joy but sadness. The upright chairs were not polished but painted. Linking more than two clauses, phrases, or words 8.200 You can link more than two clauses, words, or phrases using and or or. Usually you use the conjunction only once, putting it between the last two clauses, words, or phrases. After each of the others you put a comma. Harrison marched him to the door, threw him out and returned. …courses in accountancy, science, maths or engineering. You can also put a comma in front of the conjunction; this usually makes the sentence easier to read, especially if the separated elements contain more than one word or are not completely similar. Mrs Roberts cooked meals, cleaned, mended clothes, and went to meetings of the sewing club. In informal speech, people sometimes put and or or between each pair of clauses, words, or phrases. Occasionally, you do this in writing when you want to emphasize that all the statements you are making are true. Mrs Barnett has a gate and it’s not locked and that’s how they get out. linkingadjectivestogether8.201 There are special rules for linking more than two adjectives. When you put more than two qualitative adjectives in front of a noun, you put commas between the adjectives and do not use a conjunction. …a large, airy, comfortable room. When you put more than two classifying adjectives in front of a noun, you have to decide whether the adjectives relate to the same system of classification or to different systems. (This is explained in paragraph 8.183.) If the classifying adjectives relate to the same system, you put and between the last two adjectives and a comma after each of the others. …the country’s social, economic and political crisis. If the classifying adjectives relate to different systems of classification, you do not put anything between any of the adjectives. …an unknown medieval French poet. When you put both qualitative and classifying adjectives in front of a noun, you do not put anything between them. …a little white wooden house. When you put more than two adjectives after a linking verb, you put and between the last two adjectives and a comma after each of the others. He was big, dark and mysterious. We felt hot, tired and thirsty. In most subordinate clauses, you have no choice about the order of the clause elements (see Chapter 8). thepassive9.3 One way of changing word order in order to change the focus in a clause is to use the passive form. The passive allows you to talk about an event from the point of view of the thing or person affected, and even to avoid mentioning who or what was responsible for the action. A girl from my class was chosen to do the reading. The passive is explained in paragraphs 9.8 to 9.24. splitsentences9.4 Another way of varying the sequence of elements in the clause is to use a split sentence. There are three different types. One type allows you to focus on the person or thing you are talking about, as in It was Jason who told them. The second type allows you to focus on an action, as in What they did was break a window and get in that way or All I could do was cry. The third type allows you to focus on the circumstances of an action, for example the time or the place, as in It was one o’clock when they left, or It was in Paris that they met for the first time. Split sentences are dealt with in the section beginning at paragraph 9.25. impersonalit9.5 When you want to say something about a fact, an action, or a particular state, you can use a structure beginning with it, for example It’s strange that he didn’t call, It’s easy to laugh, and It’s no fun being stupid. You also use an it structure to talk about the weather or the time, for example It’s raining, It’s a nice day, and It’s two o’clock. It structures are dealt with in the section beginning at paragraph 9.31. therewithbeFor example, instead of saying We need a bigger garden, you can say What we need is a bigger garden. What we as a nation want is not words but deeds. What you need is a doctor. What he needed was an excuse to talk. Here is a list of verbs that can be used with what in this structure: adore dislike enjoy hate like loathe love need prefer want You can use all instead of what with the verbs want or need if you want to emphasize that someone wants or needs a particular thing and nothing else. All they want is a holiday. All a prisoner needed was a pass. If you do not want to mention the performer in the above structures, you can use a passive form of the verb, after what or all that. What was needed was a revolution. Taking the focus off the subject: using impersonal it 9.31 You often want to mention only one thing or fact in a clause. For example, you often want to focus on the type of information that is normally expressed by an adjective. But an adjective cannot stand alone as the subject of a clause. A common way of presenting information of this type is to put the adjective after be, with it as the subject. If you do not want to choose any of the clause elements as the thing you are going to talk about, you can use several structures with it as subject. It can be used: to describe a place or situation It’s lovely here. to talk about the weather or to say what the time is. It had been raining all day. It is seven o’clock. These uses are often called the impersonal uses of it. 9.32 In these uses, it does not refer back to anything earlier in the speech or writing, and so it is different from the personal pronoun, which usually refers back to a particular noun phrase: The ending, when it arrives, is completely unexpected. Paris is special, isn’t it? For more information about personal pronouns, see the section beginning at paragraph 1.95. Note that the pronoun it is also used to refer to a whole situation or fact that has been described or implied. He’s never come to see his son. It’s most peculiar, isn’t it? It doesn’t matter. It’s my fault. 9.33 It is also used to introduce a comment on an action, activity, or experience. The subject it refers forward. It costs so much to get there. It was amazing that audiences came to the theatre at all. This structure with it allows you to avoid having a long subject, and to put what you are talking about in a more prominent position at the end of the sentence. Describing a place or situation 9.34 If you want to describe the experience of being in a particular place, you can use it followed by a linking verb such as be, an adjective, and an adverbial of place. It was very hard in Germany after the war. It was terribly cold in the trucks. It’s nice down there. For more information about how to talk about place, see the section beginning at paragraph 6.53. Similarly, you can indicate your opinion of a situation using it, be, an adjective, and a clause beginning with when or if. It’s so nice when it’s hot, isn’t it? Won’t it seem odd if I have no luggage? usingitasanobject9.35 You can also use it as the object of verbs such as like and hate to describe your feelings about a place or situation. I like it here. He knew that he would hate it if they said no. Here is a list of common verbs that are used in this way: adore dislike enjoy hate like loathe love prefer Talking about the weather and the time describingtheweather:It’sraining,It’ssunny9.36 You can describe the weather by using it as the subject of a verb. It’s still raining. It was pouring with rain. It snowed steadily throughout the night. The following verbs are used after it to talk about the weather: drizzle hail pour rain sleet snow thunder You can also describe the weather by using it followed by be and an adjective by itself, or an adjective followed by a noun referring to a period of time. ‘Can I go swimming?’ – ‘No, it’s too cold.’ It was very windy. It was a warm, sunny evening. It’s a lovely day, isn’t it? Here is a list of common adjectives that are used to describe the weather: bitter blowy blustery boiling breezy chilly cloudy cold cool damp dark dry fine foggy freezing frosty hot humid icy light lovely misty muggy nasty rainy showery stormy sunny thundery warm wet windy Note that you can describe a change in the weather or light by using it followed by get and an adjective. It’s getting cold. Shall we go inside? It’s getting dark. givingtimesanddates9.37 You can say what the time, day, or date is by using it followed by be and an adjective or noun phrase referring to time. It’s eight o’clock. It’s Saturday afternoon and all my friends are out. It was July, but freezing cold. emphasizingtime9.38 You can form many useful time expressions using a structure with It is … or It was … and an adjective or noun phrase referring to time. The use of this structure puts emphasis on the time of the event. You can say when something happened using when. It was 11 o’clock at night when 16 armed men came to my house. It was nearly midnight when Kunta finally slept. You can say how long ago something happened using since. It’s two weeks now since I wrote to you. It was forty years since the war. You can say how long the period was between one event and another using before. It was ninety days before the search was over. It was four minutes before half-time. You can say how soon something will happen using to. It was only two days to the wedding. Commenting on an action, activity, or experience usinglinkingverbs9.39 A common way of commenting on what you are doing or experiencing is to use it followed by a linking verb and an adjective or noun phrase. This is followed by an -ing participle or a to-infinitive. It’s fun working for him. It was difficult trying to talk to her. It’s nice to see you with your books for a change. It will be a stimulating experience to see Mrs Oliver. If you want to mention the person who performs the action or has the experience, you use a prepositional phrase beginning with for and a to-infinitive. It becomes hard for a child to develop a sense of identity. You can also use the structure with a to-infinitive when you are recommending a course of action or saying that something is necessary. Its important to know your own limitations. It’s a good idea to have a little notebook handy. It is necessary to examine this claim before we proceed any further. usingotherverbs9.40 Similar structures can be used with verbs other than linking verbs. If you want to say what effect an experience has on someone, you can use it with a verb such as please, surprise, or shock, followed by a noun phrase and a to-infinitive. For a list of these verbs, see paragraph 9.44. It always pleased him to think of his father. It shocked me to see how much weight he’d lost. It interests him to hear what you’ve been buying. You can use it with take and a to-infinitive clause to indicate what is used in a particular action or activity, or is needed for it, for example the amount of time or the type of person that is needed. It takes an hour to get to Northampton. It takes an exceptional parent to cope with a child like that. It took a lot of work to put it together. If there is also an indirect object, this can be placed immediately after the verb. It took me a year to save up for a new camera. If the indirect object is expressed by a prepositional phrase, usually beginning with for, it is placed after the direct object. It took some time for him to realize what was required. It takes a lot more time for an adult to pick up a language than for a child. Cost can be used in similar structures when talking about the amount of something, usually money, that is used in an activity. It costs about £150 a week to keep someone in prison. With find and think, you can use it as the object, followed by an adjective, and either a to-infinitive or a that-clause. He found it hard to make friends. He thought it right to resign immediately. otherwaysoftalkingaboutactionsotherwaysoftalkingaboutactions9.41 If you want to focus on a clause that starts with a participle or a to-infinitive, you can use this clause as the subject of the main clause, instead of it. For example, instead of saying It’s fun working for him you can say Working for him is fun. Measuring the water correctly is most important. In formal English, to-infinitive clauses are sometimes used. To sell your story to the papers is a risky strategy. Commenting on a fact that you are about to mention 9.42 When you want to comment on a fact, event, or situation, you can use it followed by a linking verb, an adjective or a noun phrase, and a that-clause giving the fact. It is strange that it hasn’t been noticed before. It’s a shame he didn’t come. From the photographs it seems clear my mother was no beauty. Here is a list of adjectives used in this structure: amazing apparent appropriate awful bad clear doubtful essential evident extraordinary fair funny good important inevitable interesting likely lucky natural obvious odd plain possible probable queer sad shocking strange surprising true unbelievable unlikely wonderful Here is a list of nouns used in this structure: disgrace marvel nuisance pity shame surprise wonder USAGENOTE9.43 After adjectives like funny, odd, and strange, a clause beginning with how is sometimes used instead of a that-clause, with the same meaning. It’s funny how they don’t get on. It’s strange how life turns out. It is astonishing how he has changed. What-clauses can be used after similar adjectives when you want to comment on something that is the object of an action. It’s surprising what you can dig up. It’s amazing what some of them would do for a little publicity. Why-clauses can be used after adjectives such as obvious and clear when you want to comment on how clear the reason for something is. Looking back on these cases, it is clear why the unions distrust the law. Whether-clauses can be used after adjectives such as doubtful and irrelevant when you want to comment on something that may or may not be true. It is doubtful whether supply could ever have kept up with consumption. otherverbs9.44 If you want to say what someone thinks about a fact, you can use it followed by a verb such as please or surprise. The verb is followed by a noun phrase and a that-clause. It won’t surprise you that I stuck it in my pocket. It bothered her that Alice wasn’t interested in going out. Here is a list of verbs that can be used in this way: amaze amuse annoy appal astonish astound bewilder bother delight disgust distress grieve horrify interest please shock surprise upset worry passiveofreportingverbs9.45 If you want to say what is said, thought, or discovered by a group of people, you can use it as the subject of the passive form of a reporting verb, followed by a that-clause. It was agreed that the plan should be kept secret. It was felt that there had been some dishonest behaviour. It was found that no cases of hypothermia had been recorded. For a list of verbs that can be used in this way, see paragraph 7.69. Introducing something new: there as subject sayingthatsomethingexists:Therearefourpeopleinmyfamily9.46 When you want to say that something exists, or when you want to mention the presence of something, you can use there followed by be and a noun phrase. In this context, there does not refer to a place. In spoken English, the difference is often clearer, because this use of there is often pronounced without stress as/ðə/(American English ðər), whereas the adverb of place is almost always pronounced fully as /ðeə/ (American English ðeər). There has very little meaning in the structures that are being explained here. For example, the sentence There is a good reason for this just means A good reason for this exists. 9.47 The noun phrase is usually followed by an adverb or prepositional phrase, a wh-clause, or one of the adjectives available, present, or free. because it was in a dangerous area. The females care for their young entirely by themselves. They often fought each other, usually as a result of arguments over money. Some people refuse to give evidence, often because they feel intimidated. The phrase in particular, which has a similar meaning to particularly, can be used in the positions shown in the examples below. Wednesday in particular is very busy. Next week we shall be taking a look at education and in particular primary schools. He shouted at the children and at Otto in particular. In particular, I’m going to concentrate on hydro-electricity. Other information structures Putting something first: In his pocket was a pen, Why she’s here I don’t know 9.69 In English, the first element in a declarative clause is usually the subject of the verb. However, if you want to emphasize another element, you can put that first instead. Sometimes when this takes place the normal order of subject and verb is changed. adverbialsfirst9.70 Adverbs and prepositional phrases can often be put first. This is the normal position for sentence adverbials (see paragraph 9.56), so they are not particularly emphatic in this position. Other phrases are sometimes placed first, usually to make descriptions more dramatic or vivid in stories and accounts. At eight o’clock I went down for my breakfast. For years I’d had to hide what I was thinking. The subject and verb often change place after prepositional phrases relating to place, and after negative adverbials. In his pocket was a bag of money. On no account must they be let in. For general information on adverbials, see Chapter 6. Negative adverbials are dealt with in Chapter 5. reportedquestionfirst9.71 When you are saying that you do not know something, you can put the reported question first. What I’m going to do next I don’t quite know. How he escaped serious injury I can’t imagine. For more information on reported questions, see paragraphs 7.32 to 7.38. otherpartsoftheclause9.72 An adjective or noun phrase can occasionally be put before a linking verb, but this is not common. Noreen, she was called. She came from the village. Rare is the individual who does not belong to one of these groups. The object of a verb is sometimes put first, usually in formal or literary uses. Note that the subject still has to be mentioned. The money I gave to the agent. If they sensed my fear, they would attack. This I knew. Introducing your statement: The problem is…, The thing is… 9.73 People often use structures that point forward to what they are going to say and classify or label it in some way. These are sometimes called prefacing structures or prefaces. A preface usually introduces the second part of the same sentence, usually a that-clause or a wh-clause. However, you can also use a whole sentence as the preface to another sentence (see paragraph 9.78). pointingforwardtothesecondpartofsentence9.74 A common prefacing structure is the and a noun, followed by is; e.g. The answer is …. The noun is sometimes modified by an adjective, or there is 