D D D Theme and Rheme signal is necessary, although it is not unusual in spoken English for the theme to be marked off also by the intonation pattern (see Section 3.5). Following the terminology of the Prague school of linguists ( e.g. Garvin, 1964; Firbas, 1992), we shall use the term Theme as the label for this function. (Like all other functions it will be written with an initial capital.) The Theme is the element that serves as the point of departure of the message; it is that which locates and orients the clause within its context. The speaker chooses the Theme as his or her point of departure to guide the addressee in developing an interpretation of the message; by making part of the message prominent as Theme, the speaker enables the addressee to process the message. The remainder of the message, the part in which the Theme is developed, is called in Prague school terminology the Rheme. As a message structure, therefore, a clause consists of a Theme accompanied by a Rheme; and the structure is expressed by the order -whatever is chosen as the Theme is put first.1 The message thus unfolds from thematic prominence -the part that the speaker has chosen to highlight as the starting point for the addressee -to thematic non-prominence. (As we shall see below, in Section 3.5, the Rheme typically contains another kind of prominence, prominence as news.) In the following example, which is the first sentence of the Introduction to Roget'sThesaurus, the Theme is the present Work: The present Work is intended to supply, with respect to the English language, a desideratum hitherto unsupplied in any language; ... Here is a short passage from a guidebook, illustrating how the choice of Theme functions to organize and carry forward the discourse (Text 3-1). The boundary between Theme and Rheme is shown by +. Text 3-1: Reporting -passage from a guidebook (written, monologic) Goa Gajah + is the 'elephant cave' on the road to Gianyar, a Hindu-Buddhist temple area with several open structures, bathing pools and flowing fountains. The atmosphere outside + is peaceful, one of holiness and worship, while inside the small cave + it is surprisingly humid and dry. <sic> Beyond the main complex + is a lovely stream that bubbles under a wooden bridge, and further on + are steep stone steps leading to another complex and a large, lily-covered pond. For this popular tourist attraction, + dress properly; otherwise, sarongs (waist wrap-around skirt) + are available for rental at the door. Yeh Pulu + is a beautiful hill area filled with rock carvings and relics just a kilometre or so from Goa Gajah. Continuing northwards, Bedulu village + marks the former site of the powerful Dalem Bedulu the last king of the Pejeng dynasty who were eventually defeated by Java's Gajah Mada in 1340s. Some grammarians have used the terms Topic and Comment instead of Theme and Rheme (e.g. Hockett, 1958: 201-203; cf. also Li & Thompson, 1976). But the Topic-Comment terminology carries rather different connotations. The label 'Topic' usually refers to only one particular kind of Theme, the 'topicalTheme' (see Section 3.4); and it tends to be used as a cover term for two concepts that are functionallydistinct, one being that of Theme and the other being that of Given (see Sections 3.5 and 3.6; and cf. Fries, 1981). It seems preferable to retain the earlier terminology of Theme-Rheme. In the generative linguistic literature, Gruber (1976: 38) introduced the term 'theme' in an experiential (rather than textual) sense for a kind of participant role, a 'theta role' in generative terms. In work drawing on Fillmore's (1968)'case grammar', the term 'theme' has also been used as a label for deep case, or semantic case. In a different context, 'theme' is also used as the name of a stratum in verbal art: see Hasan (1985b: 96). D D D Theme and Rheme It will have been clear from the earlier examples that the Theme is not necessarily a nominal group; it may be some other class of group or phrase. John B. Carroll's 'Foreword' to Whorf's Language, Thought and Reality begins with the adverbial Theme, once in a blue moon: Once in a blue moon a man comes along who grasps the relationship between events which have hitherto seemed quite separate, and gives mankind a new dimension of knowledge. As a general guide to start off with, we shall say that the Theme of a clause is the first group or phrase that has some function in the experiential structure of the clause, i.e. that functions as a participant, a circumstance or the process. We shall return to this in a little more detail in Section 3.4 below (and more fully in Chapter 5); meanwhile this definition will be elaborated in the next few sections to take account of complex and multiple Themes, as well as special types of thematic patterning that create order in the discourse. The most common type of Theme is a participant, realized by a nominal group. Such Themes are sometimes announced explicitly, by means of some expression like as for ... , with regard to ... , about ... ; this has the effect of focusing the Theme. For example: As for Pope John Paul himself,+ he is known to be very keen on sport. [BE bbc/06 S1000900 531] Compare: As to that teapot, + my aunt was given it by the duke. Typically, the Theme is then 'picked up' by the appropriate pronoun in its natural place in the clause. Such picking up may occur even if the Theme is not explicitly announced by a thematic marker (as usually the case in speech, where intonation can be used; see below), as in That teapot -my aunt was given it by the duke. Oh, my little toe, look at it. [Text 76] A man who succeeds as a farmer, who succeeds as a householder -these things are highly regarded. [Text 16] 'The barge she sat in', do you remember that passage in The Waste Land7 [Text 125] Now about 'The Love Song of Alfred J. Prufrock', what is that poem about? [Text 125] Sometimes the Theme is not picked up in this way and it is left to the listener to infer the relationship: But corporations, you've got to make sure you know what you're doing, because otherwise you're out of business. [Text 101] As for the other players, I've got no apprehensions. [ ACE_A] This device enables the speaker/writer to select a Theme without disturbing the overall arrangement of the clause ( cf. below on marked Themes, Section 3 .3). D D D Group/phrase complexes as Theme; thematic equatives Such Themes still fall within the category of simple (as opposed to multiple) Themes. Any group complex or phrase complex constitutes a single element within the clause; for example, two nominal groups joined by and, like the Walrus and the Carpenter, make up a nominal groupcomplex. This is just one element in the clause, and therefore constitutes a simple Theme. The two prepositional phrases from house to house likewise make up a prepositional phrasecomplex, and this is also therefore one simple Theme. The different kinds of relationship that may be expressed in these complex structures are discussed in Chapter 8. The first sentence ofHjelmslev's Prolegomena to a theory oflanguage, Whitfield's translation, has as its Theme the nominal group complex language -human speech, consisting of two nominal groups in apposition: Language -human speech -is an inexhaustible abundance of manifold treasures. Another example of apposition in the Theme is the following, from the blurb to Hunter Davies' biography of George Stephenson: One hundred and fifty years ago, on 15 September 1830, the world's first passenger railway -the Liverpool to Manchester -was opened, an event which was to change the face of civilization. Here the Theme consists of two phrases forming a phrase complex, ending at 1830. In the above examples, the group or phrase complex is a single constituent ofthe clause; it is not specially constructed by the thematic system. There is, in addition, a special thematic resource whereby two or more separate elements are grouped together so that they form a single constituent of the Theme + Rheme structure. An example of this would be: What the duke gave to my aunt was that teapot. Here the Theme is what the duke gave to my aunt. Technically, this is still a simple Theme, because it has now been organized as a single constituent of the clause -but it is a clause of a particular kind. The clause what the duke gave to my aunt was that teapot is a thematic variant of the duke gave my aunt that teapot. Here what can be interpreted as 'that which'. This kind of clause is known as a thematic equative (cf. Halliday, 1967/8), because it sets up the Theme + Rheme structure in the form of an equation, where Theme =Rheme. The particular clause type that is being exploited to form a thematic equative is the identifyingclause; this will be described in Chapter 5, Section 5.4.4; but since it plays such an important part in the construction of the clause as a message we need to introduce it here. In a thematic equative, all the elements of the clause are organized into two constituents; these two are then linked by a relationship of identity, a kind of 'equals sign', expressedby some form of the verb be. There is an example of this in the first clause of the second paragraph of Lewis Carroll's Through the looking-glass: The way Dinah washed her children's faces was this: where the Theme is the way Dinah washed her children's faces . (Strictly speaking the was, or other form of be, serves to link the Rheme with the Theme; but for the sake of simpler D D D Group/phrase complexes as Theme; thematic equatives The thing that really infuriates me more than anything else in modern life is that the very rich, you could be absolutely filthy rich and they pay, they don't pay their share of taxation. [Text 370] The catch here is that when things get hot for the government -when its performance is so poor that its support begins to dwindle -neither side can resist the temptation to play foul. This is what happened before and is happening again. [KOHL_A] But you're the one who came here and sat with me .... so sit. [KOHL_K] that is the one I like this teapot was what the duke gave to my aunt a loaf of bread is what we chiefly need this is what happened to me the last few weeks Theme Rheme Fig. 3-4 Marked thematic equatives (nominalization as Rheme) A thematic equative (which is usually called a 'pseudo-deft sentence' in formal grammar)is an identifying clause which has a thematic nominalization in it. Its function is to expressthe Theme-Rheme structure in such a way as to allow for the Theme to consist of anysubset of the elements of the clause. This is the explanation for the evolution of clauses of this type: they have evolved, in English, as a thematic resource, enabling the message to be structured in whatever way the speaker or writer wants. Let us say more explicitly what this structure means. The thematic equative actuallyrealizes two distinct semantic features, which happen to correspond to the two senses of the word identify. On the one hand, it identifies (specifies) what the Theme is; on the other hand, it identifies it (equates it) with the Rheme. The second of these features adds a semantic component of exclusiveness: the meaningis 'this and this alone'. So, the meaning of what the duke gave my aunt was that teapot is something like 'I am going to tell you about the duke's gift to my aunt: it was that teapot-and nothing else'. Contrast this with the duke gave my aunt that teapot, where the meaningis 'I am going to tell you something about the duke: he gave my aunt that teapot' (with no implication that he did not give -or do -other things as well). Hence even when the Theme is not being extended beyond one element, this identifying structure still contributes something to the meaning of the message: it serves to expressthis feature of exclusiveness. If I say what the duke did was give my aunt that teapot, the nominalization what the duke did carries the meaning 'and that's all he did, in the context of what we are talking about'. 3 This is also the explanation of the marked form, which has the nominalization in the Rheme, as in that's the one I like. Here the Theme is simply that, exactly the same as in the non-nominalized equivalent that I like; but the thematic equativestill adds something to the meaning, by signalling that the relationship is an exclusive one It further indicates, by the choice of the 'pro-verb' did, something about the role of the duke: that he did something -he was an active participant in the process. Contrast what happened to that teapot ... , where the role of the teapot is shown to have been a passive one. See Chapter 5, Section 5.2. Nominal group 6.2.1.1 Deictic The Deictic element indicates whether or not some specific subset of the Thing is intended; and if so, which. The nature of the Deictic is determined by the system of DETERMINATION: see Figure 6-2. The primary distinction is between (i) specific or (ii) non-specific. Here is an example of the use of Deictics from the beginning of a narrative; as we shall note below, the absence of the Deictic element is also systemically meaningful within the system of non-specific determination: see Text 6-1 . Text 6-1: Recreating -narrating (written, monologic): extract from the beginning of a folk tale (Placement followed by beginning of Initiating Event) [Text 65] Pyramids, palaces, and temples of stone stand silent and abandoned, hidden by dense rain forests. But that was not always so. Long, long ago, great cities built by the Mayan people were centers of activity. In one of those cities -one whose name has long been forgotten -there lived an old halac uinic, or chief. Since he had no son to succeed him, he knew that his younger brother, Chiruma, would one day take his place. But the chief's wife wanted a child. Each day, she prayed with all her heart. And, one day, her prayers were answered. She gave birth to a son. The child was born on the 13th day of the month, a lucky day. Here a(n), one, no and each are non-specific determiners, and the absence of a determiner (0) similarly marks a nominal group as non-specific when it is plural ( e.g. pyramids) or mass (e.g. stone); and the, those, his, her, whose, and the chief's function as specific ones. Note the characteristic move from non-specific to specific: great cities -those cities; an old halac uinic, or chief -the chief; a son -the child; that is, non-specific determiners are used to introduce the discourse referent of the Thing, and specific determiners are used to track this referent in the text (see further, Chapter 9, Section 9.4).(i) The specific Deictics are given in Table 6-2; they are demonstrative or possessivedeterminers, or embedded possessive nominal groups. The subset in question is specifiedby one of two possible deictic features: either (1) demonstratively, i.e. by reference to some Table 6-2 Items (determiners, or [embedded] nominal groups) functioning as specific Deictic Determinative Interrogative Demonstrative this that which(ever) these those the what(ever) Possessive my your our his her its their whose(ever) one's [John's] [which person's], etc. [my father's], etc. 365 w O')O') DEIXISnominal -----+l group specific-TYPE OF DEIXIS MOOD OF DEIXIS personal ----.(possession) / (proximity) / -} I determinative { ('I'm telling you') --------I <demonstrative> <personal> interrogative " Deictic: 'which' " Deictic: 'whose' ('you tell me! ') speaker" Deictic: 'my' interactant speaker-plus" Deictic: 'our' ~ addressee " Deictic: 'y~ur' non-conscious" Deictic:'its'-{one only non-interactant .conscious more than one " Deictic: 'their' " Deictic: 'the'lselective --{near " Deictic: 'these' far " Deictic: 'those' I female I " Deictic: 'her' L m, " Deictic: 'his' " Deictic: 'this' " Deictic: 'that' _ ~[total non-specific -cunrestricted partial Fig.6-2 The nominal group system network: determination D D D Nominal group kind of proximity to the speaker (this, these= 'near me'; that, those = 'not near me'), or (2)by possession, i.e. by reference to person as defined from the standpoint of the speaker (my, your, our, his, her, its, their (see Figure 6-4 below); also Mary's, my father's etc.) togetherwith the possibility of an interrogative in both these categories ( demonstrative which?, possessive whose?). All these have the function of identifying a particular subset of the 'thing' that is being referred to. Many languages embody these two forms of deixis in the structure of the nominal group. The two are closely related, both being (as indicated by the term 'deixis') a form of orientation by reference to the speaker -or more accurately, to the 'speaker-now';the temporal-modal complex that constitutes the point of reference of the speech event. In some languages they are more systematically related to each other, the demonstrative having three terms instead of two: 'near me', 'near you' and 'not near either of us'. (Notethat 'near' is not restricted to a local interpretation; the meaning is 'associated with' in some sense.) Some dialects of English have a system of this kind, the three terms being this, that and yon, with corresponding locative adverbs here, there and yonder. There is one more item in this class, namely the. The word the is a specific, determinative Deictic of a peculiar kind: it means 'the subset in question is identifiable; but this will not tell you how to identify it -the information is somewhere around, where you can recover it'. So whereas this train means 'you know which train: -the one near me', and mytrain means 'you know which train: -the one I own', the train means simply 'you know which train'. Hence the is usually accompanied by some other element that supplies the information required: for example, the long train means 'you know which train: you can tell it by its length'. Compare the night train, the train with a pantograph, the next train to arrive. If there is no such information supplied, the subset in question will either be obvious from the situation, or else will have been referred to already in the discourse: for example, if you are on the platform you can say get on the train!, while the train was coming nearer and nearer might occur as part of a narrative. In an incongruent nominal group that corresponds to a congruent clause, a possessiveDeictic may correspond to one of the participants in the transitivity structure of the clause, e.g. : The Minister's decision follows his efforts to mediate since the board decided to sack the matron several weeks ago. [ ACE_A] For 26 years journalists have followed John Paul II's every move. His world travels, his Sunday blessings, his creation of cardinals and saints, and now his every sneeze. [COCA] or even (more restrictedly) to one of the circumstances, e.g.: Yesterday's decision by the Arbitration Commission effectively said 'no' to ordering employers to pay into superannuation schemes. [ACE_A] At today's official fixing by the five leading dealers, it was cut by 2s. 4d. per fine ounce -the lowest point for six weeks. [LOB_A] (cf. further Chapter 10, Section 10.5). 367 D D D Nominal group Historically the and a(n) are reduced forms of (respectively) that and one; it is also a reduced form of that (but preserving the final part, since it functions as Head, where the preservesthe initial part). there is a reduced form oflocative there. It should be pointed out here that there are two different systems of NUMBER in the English nominal group, one associated with each of the two kinds of Deictics. (i) With specific Deictics, the number system is 'non-plural/plural'; mass nouns are grouped together with singular, in a category of 'non-plural'. So this, that go with non-plural(singular or mass), these, those with plural, as in Table 6-5. Table 6-5 Number in specific nominal groups Non-plural Plural singular mass this train this electricity these trains (ii) With non-specific Deictics, the system is 'singular/non-singular'; mass nouns are grouped together with plural, in a category of 'non-singular'. So a, an goes with singular,weak some with non-singular (mass or plural), as in Table 6-6. Table 6-6 Number in non-specific nominal groups Singular Non-singular mass plural atrain (some) electricity (some) trains As noted above, if there is no Deictic element, the nominal group is non-specific and, within that, non-singular.4 In other words, a nominal group may have no Deictic elem ent in its structure, but this does not mean it has no value in the Deictic system -simply that the value selected is realized by a form having no Deictic in the expression. The two different number systems operating with specific and non-specific determination apply to all nominal groups, but the typical range of determiners and the semantic patterns of agnation depend on whether a given nominal group refers to (i) a member or members of a class (particular reference) or to (ii) to a class to which members belong (general, or 'generic', reference): see Table 6-7. We will discuss these briefly in turn. (i) When a given nominal group refers to a member or members of a class -i.e. to a particular thing or set of things, the full ranges of specific and non-specific determiners can serve as Deictic and the values within the specific and non-specific number systems are The forms trains and some trains, as in there are (some) trains on the track , are not in fact identical. But the distinction is a more delicate one, and for the purpose of this analysis they will be treated as variant expressions of the same category. 369 D D D Nominal group certain options that are quite distinct as references to members of a class are much closer in meaning as references to the class itself; these are marked [l], [2] and [3] in Table 6-7 above5. Consider the following examples of references to the class of elephants: An elephant can pound mightily on the ground, but the pressure its foot exerts is less than that exerted bya mole rat's teeth. Smaller and thinner animals can even push their way through the soil with their heads. [COCA] Elephants communicate in a complicated, sophisticated language that scientists are trying to decipher and compile into the world's first elephant dictionary. [COCA] The elephant, that noble creature known for its long memory, is no longer an appropriate symbol for a political party which has so quickly forgotten the eight rudderless years of unfettered corporate greed the nation experienced when one of its own occupied the Oval Office. [COCA] [Voiceover:] For the elephant, the herd is home. It is family. Elephant researcher, Gay Bradshaw. [GayBradshaw:] The herd is the most important component of elephant culture. They're very affectionate with their children, with each other. Always touching and talking to each other. They have a culture that they pass on through generations. They even have grieving rituals. When someone in the family dies, people gather around. They touch the body. [COCA] You might think that the elephant's peculiar way of 'running' arose solely because of its huge size. But consider the white rhinoceros, the second-largest land animal, which can weigh more than 5,000 pounds. That's half as much as an adult African elephant. Yet the rhinoceros runs exactly like a horse -a really big, nearly blind, very grumpy horse. All four of its feet leave the ground, springing the behemoth forward from step to step. Compare that with the gait of a baby elephant. [COCA] An elephant's heart beats much slower than a hummingbird's, but elephants live longer than hummingbirds so they have about the same number of heartbeats over their lives. [COCA] In the first example, the elephant illustrates type [l] in Table 6-7 above; it refers to the general class of elephants. The reference item the is homophoric, rather than anaphoric, as it would have been in reference to a particular member of the class of elephants: when we meet the elephant pounded mightily on the ground, we can assume that the elephanthas already been introduced into the discourse. While not identical in meaning, types [2] and [3] are close in meaning, and could be used instead: (type [2]:) elephants can poundmightily on the ground, and (type [2]:) the elephant can pound mightily on the ground. All three constitute ways of generalizing about elephants as a class of animal; but as references to members of a class, they would be quite distinct; compare: when I approached the river, an elephant pounded mightily on the ground; I saw an elephant some 30 yards way, but when I approached it, the elephant pounded mightily on the ground; and when I approached the river, elephants pounded mightily on the ground. Similarly, instead of for the elephant, the herd is home, we could have for an elephant, the herd is home or for elephants, the herd is home. In the last example, we can note the switch from an elephant (in an elephant's heart beats ... ) References to general classes of countable things do usually not take the form of specific plural nominal groups; we do not expect to find the elephants alongside elephants, an elephant and the elephant. But there are principled exceptions to this generalization, including references to classes of people (e.g. nationalities: the French ; certain references with Epithet as Head: the rich) . Compare also with biological taxonomies: the Ankylosaurs in the text analysed in Table 5-13, Chapter 5. 371 D D D Nominal group 1 79-198). Studies based on constructed examples need to be supplemented by corpus-based investigations. Here we can recognize that texts of different types will be more likely to involve references to particular members of classes or to the classes themselves. For example, in 'recreating' and 'reporting' texts, we are more likely to find references to particular members, but in 'expounding' texts, we are more likely to find references to classes of things, as in the entry on Ankylosaurs analysed experientially in Table 5-13, Chapter 5. In addition to the Deictic element we have just discussed, there may be a second Deictic element in the nominal group, one which adds further to the identification of the subset in question. We will refer to these as post-Deictic or Deictic2. The post-Deictic identifies a subset of the class of 'thing' by referring to its fame or familiarity, its status in the text, or its similarity/dissimilarity to some other designatedsubset. For example: Virgil has enumerated abstractions and the customary grisly inhabitants ofTartarus [LOB_J] A typical elution curve is shown in Figure 3. [LOB_J] Of these, at the time of the search, there were three, in a sealed container; and there is irrefutable evidence to prove that this same container was still there, still sealed and intact, when Wynter's body was discovered. [LOB_L] The plane has a built-in stereo tape-recorder which can play for the whole four hours it will take to fly to Majorca. [LOB_A] There are many self-styled anarchists who insist, often with great passion, that theirs is the only right way, and that others do not merit the term (and maybe are criminals of one or another sort). [Text 212] This is the necessary first step. [LOB-BJ Further information is required to elucidate fully the possible role of these contaminants. [LOB_J] These can be interpreted in terms of (1) the categories of expansion and (2) the categoriesof projection. The words occurring as post-Deictic are adjectives, and may also occur in the function of Epithet but with a different sense; those that frequently occur as post-Deictic are shown in Table 6-8. Also found in the post-Deictic position in the nominal group are words expressing the speaker's attitude (to the thing, or else to the world in general), such as wretched, miserable, lousy, lovely, splendid, magnificent as in those lovely two evenings in Bali: The Sphinx and the splendid three Pyramids are one of the remaining Seven Wonders of the World. A larger group of unfortunate organizations spend all their time east of the merge point, on those miserable two miles of asphalt and concrete. The attitude may be focused on the number represented by the Numerative (with a singular determiner a(n) as Deictic and a plural noun as Thing): For a lousy two weeks in New Jersey, you'll make a shitload of dough [COCA] Flashback digital recorder weighs just three ounces -but its Intel memory cartridges hold an impressive 30 or 60 minutes of high-quality recordings. [COCA] 373 D D D Nominal group Table 6-9 Items (numerals, or [embedded] nominal groups) functioning as Numerative Definite Indefinite quantitative one two three, etc. few little [a bit on, etc. [a couple of]. etc. several [a number on,etc. [a quarter of]. etc. many much [ a lot on, etc. fewer less more [the same amount of]. etc. ordinative first second third, etc. preceding subsequent, etc. next last (a) The quantifying Numeratives (or 'quantitatives') specify either an exact number (cardinal numerals, e.g. two trains) or an inexact number (e.g. many trains, lots of trains);for example: the Senate confirmed seven Cabinet secretaries [Text 113] they have identified several proteins that help Ephs and ephrins control the cytoskeleton [Text 398] many visitors prefer the fine beaches of Redondo Beach State Beach, Torrance County Beach, and Malaga Cove, south of the city [Text 140] I see fewer experimental stories than I did in the decades previous to the eighties. [Text 21] An unknown number of passengers are still missing [Text 5] (b) The ordering Numeratives (or 'ordinatives') specify either an exact place in order ( ordinal numerals, e.g. the second train) or an inexact place ( e.g. a subsequent train); for example: For the third time in a decade, the telephone company is changing people's phone numbers. [Text 15] On this short London holiday, he began writing a sea novel, which, after surviving subsequent jungle travel, shipwreck on the Congo, and a railway cloakroom in Berlin, came into the hands of Edward Garnett and through him to a London publisher. [Text 153] An inexact Numerative expression may be exact in the context; for example, just as many trains ('as mentioned before'), the next train ('from now on'). On the other hand, an exact Numerative expression may be made inexact by submodification, as in about ten trains, almost the last train. For discussion of the related category of 'measure nominals', see Section 6.2.6. In an incongruent nominal group that stands as a metaphoric variant of a clause, the Numerative may correspond to a conjunction; for example, subsequent jungle travel can be reworded as a congruent clause: subsequently it travelled through the jungle. 375 D D D Nominal group Even in the superlative, which, with experiential Epithets, is almost always used to define (e.g. ours was the longest train), an attitudinal Epithet is still not defining. For example, he said the silliest things is normally equivalent to he said some very silly things. A word like silliest can be used to define, as in the silliest things of all were said by the chairman; but in that case it has an experiential function. Note that, in general, the same word may act as either experiential or interpersonal Epithet; many of the latter are adjectives of size, quality or age, e.g. lovely, little, old: I've been writing this old novel so long I can't wait. [Text 21] I saw it in this dinky little magazine. [Text 119] Since expressions of attitude tend to be strung prosodically throughout the clause, rather than being associated with one particular place, there are very few words that serve only an attitudinal function. Interpersonal Epithets tend to precede the experiential ones. As we have seen, many of them may also occur as post-Deictic; in that case their deictic function consists rather in referring to, or even in constructing, an occasion of shared experience as in a miserable few dishes of peanuts. But whereas with adjectives of experiential quality the difference between Epithet and post-Deictic is rather clear ( e.g. the three famous musketeers, the famous three musketeers), with the interpersonal ones the difference is much less, and there is no sense of ambiguity in the meaning (contrast those lovely two evenings in Bali and those two lovelyevenings in Bali). Interpersonal Epithets also tend to be reinforced by other words, or other features, all contributing to the same meaning: synonyms ( e.g. a horrible ugly great lump), intensifiers, swear-words, particular intonation contours, voice quality features, and the like. 6.2.1.4 Classifier The Classifier indicates a particular subclass of the thing in question, e.g. electric trains, passenger trains, toy trains. Sometimes the same word may function either as Epithet or as Classifier, with a difference in meaning: e.g. fast trains may mean either 'trains that go fast' (fast= Epithet) or 'trains classified as expresses' (fast= Classifier). The line between Epithetand Classifier is not a very sharp one, but there are significant differences. Classifiers do not accept degrees of comparison or intensity -we cannot have a more electric train or a veryelectric train; and they tend to be organized in mutually exclusive and exhaustive sets -a train is either electric, steam or diesel. The range of semantic relations that may be embodied in a set of items functioning as Classifier is very broad; it includes material, scale and scope, purpose and function, status and rank, origin, mode of operation -more or less any feature that may serve to classify a set of things into a system of smaller sets; for example: Prison guards restrain the inmates with electric shock stun guns, leg irons, pepper spray and restraint chairs. [Text 1] Macquarie laid the foundation stone of the Cathedral the following year. [Text 22] Even the jointed wooden lion put on airs. [Text 28] Famous organists go into raptures over the tonal excellence of the Centennial Hall's organ, one of the two largest original 19th century organs in the world, with 8,500 pipes. [Text 22] 377 D D D Nominal group 6.2.1.5 Experiential functions and word classes We have now identified the nominal group functions of Deictic, post-Deictic (or Deictic2), Numerative, Epithet, Classifier and Thing. The classes of word that most typically realize these functions are as follows ( cf. Chapter 2, Figure 2-10): Deictic Deictic2 Numerative Epithet Classifier Thing determiner adjective numeral adjective noun or adjective noun But there are other possibilities: for example, numeral occurring as Classifier, as in first prize, or embedded nominal group as possessive Deictic, e.g. the day before yesterday's paper.These word classes -noun (=common noun), adjective, numeral and determiner -are all different kinds of noun; they are sub-classes of this one primary class. This larger class can be referred to as 'nominals', to avoid confusion with 'noun' in its narrower, more specific sense. Other words also enter into the nominal group, namely words of the class verb, which may function as Epithet or Classifier. Verbs function in the nominal group in one of two forms: (i) present (active) participle, V-ing, e.g. losing, as in a losing battle; (ii) past (passive, or intransitive) participle, V-en, e.g. lost, as in a lost cause. When functioning as Epithet, these forms usually have the sense of the finite tense to which they are most closely related: the present participle means 'which is (was/will be) ... ing', the past participle means 'which has (had/will have) been ... ed'. When functioning as Classifier, they typically have the sense of a simple present, active or passive: present (= active) 'which ... s', past (=passive) 'which is ... ed' . Examples: Verb as Epithet (i) a galloping horse (' a horse which is galloping') a bleeding nose ('a nose which is bleeding') If however the verb is one which does not normally take the 'present in present' tense be ... ing (i.e. a verb expressing a mental or relational process), the distinction between 'which . . . s' and 'which is . . . ing' is neutralized; the next pair of examples are also Epithets: the resulting confusion ('the confusion which results') a knowing smile ('a smile which (suggests that the smiler] knows') (ii) a wrecked car ('a car which has been wrecked') a fallen idol (' an idol which has fallen') 379 D D D Nominal group ordinal is a kind of superlative cardinal: third= 'three-est', i.e. identified by being at number three. Next come the qualitative features, again with superlatives preceding others: the oldest trains 'trains for which oldness is the identifying feature' . Often there is an intensifier, such as very, or an attitudinal element like nice, terrible as a marker of the quality. Finally, comes class membership; this reduces the size of the total set referred to in the noun byspecifying a sub-set, e.g. passenger train 'kind oftrain that is for carrying passengers'. We are talking here, it should be made clear, of the identifying potential of these elements. In any actual instance, the item in question may or may not be identifying; and this is the function of the word the at the beginning of the group -to signal that something that is capable of identifying is actually functioning in this way. So there is a progression in the nominal group from the kind of element that has the greatest specifying potential to that which has the least; and this is the principle of orderingthat we have already recognized in the clause. In the clause, the Theme comes first. We begin by establishing relevance: stating what it is that we are using to introduce this clause into the discourse, as 'this is where I'm starting from' -typically, though by no means necessarily, something that is already 'given' in the context. In the nominal group, we beginwith the Deictic: 'first I'll tell you which I mean', your, these, any, a, etc. So the principlethat puts the Theme first in the clause is the same as that which puts the Deictic first in the nominal group: start by locating the Thing in relation to the here-&-now -in the space-time context of the ongoing speech event. From there we proceed to elements that have successively less identifying potential -which, by the same token, are increasingly permanent as attributes. By and large, the more permanent the attribute of a Thing, the less likely it is to identify it in a particular context. So we proceed with the very impermanent,quantitative characterization that is nearest to a Deictic, e.g. three in three balls; throughvarious qualitative features such as new in new ball; and end up with the most permanent,the assignment to a class, e.g. tennis ball. Within the qualitative characteristics, if more than one is specified there is, again, a tendency to more from the less permanent to the more permanent; e.g. a new red ball rather than a red new ball. 6.2.2.2 Qualifier What of the element which follows the Thing? The original example, Look at those two splendid old electric trains with pantographs, ended with the phrase with pantographs; this also is part of the nominal group, having a function we shall refer to as Qualifier. Unlike the elements that precede the Thing, which are words (or sometimes word complexes, like two hundred, very big; see Section 6.3.2), what follows the Thing is either a phrase or a clause. For example: Guinness, who was knighted in 1959, had a long film partnership [with director David Lean]. [Text 90] The course [ of science] and the course [ of military endeavors] is very close. After all, Archimedes was designing devices [for military purposes]. [Text 234] The smoking [ of tobacco] altered daily custom, as did the drinking [ of coffee or tea or cocoa]. [Text 122] Do you read any English novelists [ who seem to you Kafkaesque]? [Text 125] First, I divided the presidents between bibliophiles and those [ to whom books were more or less alien territory] . [Text 110] 381 D D D Nominal group (a) the Deictic determiner (b) the Deictic determiner (c) the Deictic determiner children Thing noun children Thing noun children Thing noun [in [blue hats] ] Qualifier prepositional phrase [[ wearing blue hats ]I Qualifier clause, non-finite [[ who are wearing blue hats ]I Qualifier clause, finite Fig.6-3 Nominal group with (a} prepositional phrase, (b} non-finite clause, and (c} finite clause as Qualifier A clause functioning as Qualifier in the nominal group is referred to as a relative clause; more specifically, as a defining relative clause (in contrast to a non-defining relative clause, which is not embedded but hypotactically dependent: see Sections 7.4.1 and 7.4.5). In an incongruent nominal group corresponding to a congruent clause, Qualifierscorrespond to participants or circumstances in the transitivity structure of the clause; or when the Head/Thing of the nominal group is a nominalization of a verb of sensing or saying, they may correspond to projected clauses in a clause nexus. Carnation has been available in the UK since 1946, but the main marketing effort dates only from 1954 with the removal [of restrictions [on sales]]. [LOB_E] THE decision [by the Arbitration Commission] [to award the 2.3 percent pay increase] is unfortunate, but it was to be expected. [ACE_B] This is the real meaning of the US Senate's decision (last week] [to override any possibility of a presidential veto for real, hard-hitting sanctions against the separate, increasingly desperate tribes [ that make up the political entity of South Africa] ] . [ACE_B] As the examples illustrate, participants reconstrued as Qualifiers are realized by prepositionalphrases with either of or by; circumstances are realized in the same way that they would be realized in clauses, by either prepositional phrases or adverbial groups. 6.2.3 Experiential structure of the nominal group: the Thing The element we are calling Thing is the semantic core of the nominal group. It may be realized by a common noun, proper noun or (personal) pronoun. The personal pronoun represents the world according to the speaker, in the context of a speech exchange. The basic distinction is into speech roles (I, you) and other roles (he,she, it, they); there is also the generalized pronoun (one). These categories are set out in Figure 6-4. 383 D D D Nominal group for the grammar, in terms of the likelihood of nouns to appear as participants in different process types, but its conceptual framework is lexical rather than grammatical. We cannot attempt a detailed categorization here. But we can identify a small number of vectors along which words capable of functioning as Thing are ordered in terms of the grammar, so that the functional potential of any one noun or pronoun will be suggested by its location on each of these vectors ( cf. also Halliday & Matthiessen, 1999). These are: (1) countability: count/mass (2) animacy: conscious/non-conscious (3) generality: general/particular (I) Countability. Things are represented in English as either (a) discrete, and therefore countable, or (b) continuous, and therefore uncountable; the grammar thus makes a categorical distinction into count nouns and mass nouns, such that count nouns select for NUMBER: singular/plural, while mass nouns do not. As pointed out above (Section 6.1 ), mass nouns are treated as singular where the deixis is specific, e.g. do you like this poetry/ this poem?, and as plural where the deixis is non-specific, e.g. I've written some poetry/some poems.The distinction is not quite as clear-cut as this suggests. Mass nouns are often itemized, and hence also pluralized; the meaning is either 'a kind of', as in I've found a new polish, or 'an amount of', as in three coffees please. There will then be an agnate expression having a measure/type word as Head (see Section 6.2.6): a new type of polish, three cups of coffee. Mass nouns representing abstract things, and also things that are concrete but general,often move into the count category: experiences, researches, informations, fruits, furnitures are all relatively recent plural forms. We could think in terms of a dine of countability, rangingfrom those nouns (and pronouns) which construe things as fully itemized, at one end, to those which treat them as totally unbounded at the other. Typically, living beings and concrete objects are itemized, abstract entities (and nominalized processes and qualities) are unbounded, with institutions and collectives falling in between. But the distinction is made by the grammar, so the same entity may be construed in more than one way; e.g. hat(s) -headgear, fish(es) -fish, novel(s) -fiction . (2) Animacy. Here again the grammar makes a categorical distinction: (a) conscious things, which are those referred to as he/she, (b) non-conscious things, those referred to as it. This was brought up in Chapter 5, Section 5.3.1, where we showed that, while there is a clear foundation in the world of experience, with people at one end and inanimate or abstract objects at the other, many things (like non-human animals) lie in between; and, as always, the grammar is free to construe the world as it pleases.The conscious/non-conscious distinction can also therefore be looked at as a dine; and it is one that has received a lot of attention in typological linguistics, under the name of animacy. This, as already remarked, refers to the likelihood of any thing to occur as Actor in a transitive material process, the 'most animate' in this sense being, obviously, post-infancy humans. We noted in Chapter 5 that it is in mental processes that the category of conscious things is clearly delineated, so that any thing functioning as Senser is thereby construed as a 385 D D D Nominal group 6.2.4 A note on interpersonal and textual contributions We noted at the beginning ofthe chapter that in analysing group structure it is not necessary to set up three distinct 'lines' corresponding to the experiential, interpersonal and textual metafunctions. A single structural representation will suffice. We have been able to express this in experiential terms, because it is a general principle of linguistic structure that it is the experiential meaning that most clearly defines constituents (cf. Chapter 2, Table 2-7; see also Halliday, 1979). Interpersonal meanings tend to be scattered prosodically throughout the unit; while textual meanings tend to be realized bythe order in which things occur, and especially by placing of boundaries. These are verygeneral tendencies, worked out differently in every language but probably discernible in all. In Part I we saw this pattern in the clause, and it will become clearer by the end of Part II. The textual meaning of the clause is expressed by what is put first (the Theme); by what is phonologically prominent (and tends to be put last -the New, signalled by information focus); and by conjunctions and relatives which if present must occur in initial position. Thus it forms a wave-like pattern of periodicity that is set up by peaks of prominence and boundary markers. The interpersonal meanings are expressed by the intonation contour; by the 'Mood' element, which may be repeated as a tag at the end; and by expressions of modality that may recur throughout the clause ( cf. Halliday, 1970). The pattern here is prosodic, 'field' -like rather than wave-like. To complete the triad, first proposed by Pike (1959), of 'language as particle, wave and field', the kind of meaning that is expressed in a particle-like manner is the experiential; it is this that gives us our sense of the buildingblocks of language. Since we are using particle theory (constituency) as the foundation of the present analysis -it tends to be conceptually and operationally simpler than models of wave or field -it is natural to represent the structure of the nominal group, in which the functional components are (in English) rather clearly defined, in straightforwardlyexperiential terms. We shall say little more about the other components, beyond recognizing their presence in what has already been discussed. (1) Interpersonal meanings are embodied (a) in the person system, both as pronouns (person as Thing, e.g. she, you) and as possessive determiners (person as Deictic, e.g. her, your); in forms of assessment serving as post-Deictic ( e.g. probabilitypossible and evidentiality alleged'); (c) in the attitudinal type of Epithet, e.g. splendid in our earlier example; ( d) in connotative meanings of lexical items functioning in the group, and (e) in prosodic features such as swear-words and voice quality ( cf. Poynton, 1996). (2) Textual meaning is embodied throughout the entire structure, since it determines the order in which the elements are arranged, as well as patterns of information structure just as in the clause (note, for example, that the unmarked focus of information in a nominal group is on the word that comes last, not the word that functions as Thing: on pantographs, not on trains) . This means that there is a certain potential for assigning experientially similar meanings different textual statuses within the structure of the nominal group. In particular, they may be presented either as Classifier or as Qualifier ( e.g. wooden table -table of wood')and as either Deictic or as Qualifier ( e.g. my brother's house -house of my brother)7, with And there are further possibilities; for example, Keats wrote A thing of beauty is a joy for ever with of beauty as Qualifier rather than A beautiful thing is a joy for ever with beautiful as Epithet. 387 D D D Nominal group of just one such relationship, that of subcategorization: 'a is a subset of x' . This has usually been referred to in the grammar of the nominal group as modification, so we will retain this more familiar term here. Let us first consider the same example, but this time starting with the most general term, trains. Moving to the left, we get: ( which trains? -) electric trains; (which electric trains?-) old electric trains; (which old electric trains?-) splendid old electric trains; and so on. Calling trains the Head, we can represent this as in Figure 6-6, using the letters of the Greek alphabet. those Itwo Isplendid Iold Ielectric trains Modifier Head s 1£ lo lr 1~ (X Fig. 6-6 Head and Modifier The basis of the subcategorization, of course, shifts as we move to the left: 'what typeof ... ?', 'what quality of ... ?', 'how many ... ?' and so on -this is the principle underlying the experiential structure. Here, however, we are not concerned with the differences but with the similarities: with the general relationship that runs throughout the pre-Headmodification of the nominal group, whatever the experiential function of the individual elements. Figure 6-7 gives another example. a magnificent ornamental eighteenth-century carved mahogany mantelpiece Modifier Head £ 0 y (X Fig. 6-7 Modification: a further example Within this logical structure there may be submodification: that is, internal bracketing, as in Figure 6-8; for example: The discussion of the optimal policy when the outcome of one stage is not known before passing to the next is a very much more difficult matter. [BROWNl _J] I only wish, too, naturally, they could be sitting here, my father, who spent 40 years helping to administer the public school systems in San Francisco, and my mother, who taught us by example that the education of her children meant so very much more than material comforts. (COCA] It's way more expensive than your average ultrabook, but it's got way more horsepower, too. Submodification may have the effect of disturbing the natural order of elements in the group; this accounts for additional items occurring before the Deictic, as in almost the last buttercup (rather than the almost last buttercup), such a bright moon (rather than a such bright moon), and also for displaced elements, as in not so very difficult a task (instead of a not so very difficult task). 389 Nominal group (a) (look at) those two (b) (look at) those (c) which? Deictic Numerative Deictic Deictic Modifier Head Head Head a a a Fig. 6-9 Nominal group with (a) Numerative as Head, (b) and (c) Deictic as Head There is one functional environment in which we regularly find Epithet as Head, namelywhen the nominal group occurs as Attribute, typically in an attributive relational clause (see Chapter 5, Section 5.4.3). Here, beside forms with noun (Thing) as Head, typically with non-specific Deictic as in you're a very lucky boy, there is the equally common type with adjective (Epithet) as Head, e.g. you 're very lucky. This type of nominal group (sometimesreferred to distinctively as 'adjectival group'8) is unique in that it is normally unable to function as Subject in the clause. As noted in Chapter 5, these represent classes defined byreference to a property (lucky= 'a member, or instance, of the class of lucky ones'); theyreadily become Subject by the addition of a noun or noun substitute as Head, e.g. luckypeople, a lucky one like you. A few adjectives occur simply following the, like the rich; but this is not a productive configuration9• Other than this type, Epithets and Classifiers do not normally function as Head. The exception is the superlative, which in other ways also ( e.g. place in sequence) resembles a Numerative of the ordering kind rather than an Epithet: for example (he wants) the smallest. With other Epithets, and with Classifiers, if the Thing is not made explicit it is realized as a substitute one/ones; for example, (he wants) a small one/a wooden one. The substitute is then both Head and Thing, as in Figure 6-10: (we want) some very small wooden ones Deictic Epithet Classifier Thing Modifier Head 0 y a Sub-Mod. Sub-Head y~ ya determiner adverb adjective adjective noun: substitute Fig. 6-10 Nominal group with substitute one 8 Or 'quality group', in the Cardiff grammar: see e.g. Fawcett (2000: 164, 206-207). 9 In Modern English, this is restricted to certain abstractions (And then the inevitable happened [KOHL_P])and general classes of beings (e.g. Instead he goes down and lives among and with the poor and oppressed [ACE_D]); but in German and other Germanic languages, such wordings can be used to refer not only to general classes of people but also to particular members of a class. 391 D D D Nominal group these two women have always got loads of washing out, loads of tablecloths [LLC_04] and I think you've all four of you given your own subjective reactions to three of these four phenomena [LLC_0S] And it may not be the last of the storms for Washington and the rest of the country. [COCA] (For expressions of extended Numeratives, see below.)(iii) Head as Epithet. This is a more restricted type in which the Head is almost always an attitudinal noun (rather than adjective) embodying some positive or more usuallynegative appraisal. This appraisal may be extended prosodically by adjectives modifying the attitudinal noun. For example: I met this feisty, wonderful, paradoxical genius of a woman that I'm nuts about [COCA] In the row ahead of ours, a blond-haired, blue-eyed Christmas-tree angel of a teenager turned out to be awaiting trial for shooting a nun pointblank in the head. [COCA] He's a hell of a pitcher, probably the best in the game right now, and as long as he knows he can go to another level, the sky's the limit for that kid. [COCA] The Chronicle called it 'a beached whale of a building'. [COCA] he has apparently been an absolute nightmare of a client [Text 82] that some thieving bastard of a cop had walked off with his cigarettes [BROWNl_L] I had been dragging and pulling and tugging my stupid fool of a brother all the while [KOHL_K] ... ordinary people, many of whom have never been involved politically before, who arc feeling extraordinarily concerned about this gigantic monster of a bill that seems to be, you know, being rammed down everybody'sthroats [COCA] A number of these have become well-worn cliches like having a whale of a time. (iv) Head as Classifier. This occurs in examples such as The concept of an intercolonial exhibition was a new one [ ACE_J] The RBC model includes concepts of Leadership, Teamwork, Professional Practice, Care Delivery, Resources, and Outcomes. [COCA] Mixer fell into the category of mutt, an English shepherd and something or the other. [COCA] Over the next fortnight, the Brisbane Olympic Games delegation will filter into the small Swiss city of Lausanne, on the shores of Lake Geneva. [ACE_B] He's likely to point to the capture over the weekend of the cities of Brega and Ras Lanuf by anti-Qaddafi forces. [COCA] where the Head word specifies the class to which the Thing is being said to belong. This construction is close in meaning to a variant without of, as in the word 'freedom'; cf. above, Section 6.2.2.2, on Qualifiers realized by nominal groups, as the example given there, mybrother the lawyer. When the Head is Classifier, both Head and Thing can be either singular or plural, as illustrated above. However, when the Head is Epithet, the construction is, as already noted, more restricted, and plurals seem much less likely; compare my stupid fool of a brother with the less likely my stupid fools of siblings. 393 Nominal group Table 6-11 Extended Numeratives Measure (quantity) Type (quality) Head> Thing aggregate variety collective a pack of ea rds such acrowd of people a kind of owl my dialect of English Head< Thing portion facet partitive aslice of cake the front of the house the fragment of a novel three sides of asquare Head = Thing quantum make-up quantitative a cup of coffee some area of land a drink of water their sense of insecurity strong cup of tea, although clearly it is the tea that is strong, not the cup. Similarly: a bloodygood cup of coffee [COCA]. It is partly the rather ambivalent nature of this structure, in which Head and Thing are separated, that causes this to happen; but it also arises because in many instances the Epithet could apply equally well to either, as in a cloud of thick smoke, a thick cloud of smoke, which provides the model for a strong cup of tea . (Classifiers, on the other hand, do not get transferred; we do not say a brown slice of bread.) Sometimes the Epithet belongs more naturally with the Numerative, as in a large cup of tea; but even here one can never have an Epithet that characterizes the item in question in any way other than its function as a Numerative -one cannot say a blue cup of tea to mean 'a cup of tea in a blue cup'. Finally, it is not unusual to have an Epithet in both positions, as in a thick layer of powdery snow, a plastic cup of red, watery punch [COCA]. While measure items delimit the Thing in terms of quantity, those of type delimit it in terms of generality: some species of it, some aspect of it, or its composition. Those of varietyinclude a few very general terms such as kind, sort, type; these are the expressions that have led to the use of kind of, sort of as little more than markers of hesitation in casual speech. The words example, instance, specimen sometimes function in a similar way, especially in exemplifying identifying clauses, e.g. a toad is an example of an amphibian, whereas with a word like kind the meaning of classification is embodied in the clause structure and is construed by the clause structure even where the classifying word is omitted (a toad is an amphibian) . In expressions of facet such as the front of the house, the entire length of the narrative, the Head noun front, length is related in function to the preposition in a prepositional phrase: before/in front of the house, throughout the narrative. There is, in fact, a dine from one to the other: for example at the summit of the hill (where summit is both Head and Thing) -at/onthe top of the hill -on top of the hill -(atop the hill -) on the hill (where hill is both Head and Thing). In on top of the hill, on top of is a preposition group (see Section 6.4.3 below); here top has no Deictic, cannot be pluralized, and can be used with abstract Things (I think we've got on top of the problem) . But at/on the top of the hill forms a prepositional phrase (see Section 6.5): the preposition is at or on; the top of the hill is the Complement, where top 395 