Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 FlyersHandbook for teachers Cambridge Englidh Qualifications LogoCambridge English LogoAdvertPre A1 Starters, A1 Movers, A2 Flyers.Motivate children to learn.Motivate children to learnFun and colourful exams for young learnersC2C1B2A2B1A1Pre A1Make the most of your handbookThe best way to get the most from your handbook is to use the digital version which is updated more regularly.The digital version contains links which take you straight to related pages if you want to find out more. For example, you can read about Part 1 of the Reading and Writing paper in the Tasks section, then click on the link to take you straight to a sample Part 1 task. There are also links which take you to useful websites and resources.04 About Cambridge English05 Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers – an overview06 Exam preparation and support07 About the examPre A1 Starters13Page 13Page 1319Page 19Page 1925Page 25Page 2529 Grammar and structures listA1 Movers33 Paper 1: Listening39Page 39Page 3947Page 47Page 4752Page 52Grammar and structures listA2 Flyers57Page 57Page 5763Page 63Page 6373Page 73Page 7377Page 77Grammar and structures listThematic vocabulary lists79 Page 79Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 FlyersSpeaking assessment85 Page 83Pre A1 StartersPage 8687 Page 86A2 Flyers88 Page 88Glossary of Speaking Scales termsAbout Cambridge EnglishTo learn English is to enjoy and experience a language that opens up opportunities across the world.Together with teachers and our partners, we’re here to engage and inspire millions of people throughout their entire learning journey. We help them confidently prove their skills to the world.We believe that language is at the heart of being human, and English can unlock a lifetime of experiences. We help individuals everywhere connect, communicate and come closer together.Where your world grows.• 5.9 million assessments taken every year*• Accepted by over 25,000 organisations worldwide• 2,800 exam centres in 130 countries• Over 50,000 preparation centres*Average number of assessments delivered in the last 3 years.Cambridge Englidh Qualifications LogoCambridge English Qualifications are in-depth exams that make learning English enjoyable, effective and rewarding. Our unique approach encourages continuous progression with a clear path to improving language skills. Each of our qualifications focuses on a level of the Common European Framework of Reference (CEFR), enabling learners to develop and build speaking, writing, reading and listening skills. Our qualifications are based on research into effective teaching and learning. They motivate people of all ages and abilities to learn English and develop practical skills for the real world. We have Cambridge English Qualifications for: • Schools • General and higher education Whether learners are planning to live, work or study in their own country or abroad, our qualifications prove they have the English language skills to succeed. To find out more about Cambridge English Qualifications and the CEFR, go to cambridgeenglish.org/cefrCommon European Framework of Reference (CEFR) & Cambridge English Qualification DiagramA1 MoversA1 Movers DigitalPre A1 StartersDigitalPre A1 StartersPre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers – an overviewPre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers, designed for young learners, provide a reliable and consistent measure of how well a child is doing in learning English. The exams are designed to make learning fun. Children are motivated by working towards certificates and earning the ‘shields’ that record their progress.Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers lead on to other Cambridge English Qualifications designed for young people, for example A2 Key for Schools, B1 Preliminary for Schools and B2 First for Schools. The exams take account of relevant research in a number of areas and the specific needs of prospective users (children, parents and teachers).In producing the exams, particular attention is paid to the educational consequences of using a language test with young learners, and the following areas are carefully considered:• current approaches to curriculum design andpedagogy for young learners, including recent coursebooks and other resource materials• children’s cognitive and first language development• the potential influence of test methods, including the familiarity and appropriacy of different task types, question formats, typography and layout• probable variation between different first languagegroups and cultures.Above all, it is essential for the testing experience to have a positive impact on the children’s language learning.Who are these exams for?Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers are designed to offer a comprehensive approach to testing the English of learners in primary and lower secondary education.What level are the exams?The exams are aligned with the CEFR. Pre A1 Starters is targeted at Pre A1. A1 Movers is targeted at Pre A1 and A1, with a strong performance indicating A1. A2 Flyers is targeted at A1 and A2, with a strong performance indicating A2. The table above right shows how these qualifications are linked to the CEFR as well as their relationship to A2 Key for Schools. Results are also aligned to the Cambridge English Scale. The Cambridge English Scale is designed to complement the CEFR.Exam level graphicStarters, Movers and Flyers exams are designed to help children achieve internationally recognised standards of English. The three exams are aligned to the Council of Europe’s Common European Framework of Reference (CEFR) at Levels Pre A1, A1 and A2.Results for the exams are mapped to the Cambridge English Scale. The Cambridge English Scale is designed to complement the CEFR.There is no pass or fail in Starters, Movers and Flyers. All children receive a certificate which shows how many shields they receive in each skill (speaking, reading & writing and listening). The maximum score is five shields.The table below provides examples of young learners’ typical English language abilities at the Pre A1 to A2 levels of the CEFR:We are Cambridge Assessment English. Part of the University of Cambridge, we help people learn English and prove their skills to the world.B1A2A1PreA180100120140160CEFR levelCambridgeEnglishScaleMoversStartersFlyersKey for SchoolsDistinctionMeritPassLevel A1Starters, Movers and FlyersListening and SpeakingReading and WritingA2120–139CAN understand instructions given in more than one sentence.CAN understand simple spoken descriptions of objects, people and events.CAN understand simple conversations on everyday topics.CAN ask basic questions about everyday topics.CAN tell short, simple stories using pictures or own ideas. CAN give simple descriptions of objects, pictures and actions. CAN talk briefly about activities done in the past.CAN understand simple written descriptions of objects, people and events.CAN understand simple, short stories containing narrative tenses.CAN read and understand short texts, even if some words are unknown.CAN link phrases or sentences with connectors like ‘and’, ‘because’ and ‘then’. CAN write simple descriptions of objects, pictures and actions.CAN write a short, simple story using pictures or own ideas.A1100–119CAN understand very simple spoken dialogues about familiar topics with the help of pictures.CAN understand very simple spoken descriptions about people and objects.CAN express agreement or disagreement with someone using short, simple phrases. CAN respond to questions on familiar topics with simple phrases and sentences. CAN give simple descriptions of objects, pictures and actions.CAN tell a very simple story with the help of pictures.CAN ask someone how they are and ask simple questions about habits and preferences.CAN understand some simple signs and notices.CAN read and understand some short factual texts with the help of pictures. CAN read and understand some short, simple stories about familiar topics with the help of pictures.CAN write short, simple phrases and sentences about pictures and familiar topics.CAN write simple sentences giving personal details.CAN write short, simple sentences about likes and dislikes.Pre A1Below 100CAN understand letters of the English alphabet when heard.CAN understand some simple spoken instructions given in short, simple phrases. CAN understand some simple spoken questions about self – such as name, age, favourite things or daily routine.CAN understand some very simple spoken descriptions of people – such as name, gender, age, mood, appearance or what they are doing.CAN understand some very simple spoken descriptions of everyday objects – such as how many, colour, size or location.CAN understand some very short conversations that use familiar questions and answers.CAN name some familiar people or things – such as family, animals, and school or household objects.CAN give very basic descriptions of some objects and animals – such as how many, colour, size or location.CAN respond to very simple questions with single words or a ‘yes/no’ response.CAN read and understand some simple sentences, including questions. CAN follow some very short stories written in very simple language. CAN write the letters of the English alphabet.CAN write name using the English alphabet. CAN copy words, phrases and short sentences. CAN spell some very simple words correctly.Marks and results In the Reading and Writing papers in Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers, correct spelling is required. In Part 2 of the Listening paper some misspellings are allowed. Candidates must follow the instructions carefully and keep within the word limits. The completed question papers are returned to Cambridge to be marked.Results are reported in a way designed to provide positive encouragement to learners. There is no pass or fail, and all candidates who complete their exam receive a Statement of Results and certificate showing what they can do. Candidates are awarded shields (out of a maximum of five) for each part of the test. The Statement of Results also gives information on their strengths, areas to improve and ideas on how to improve.The exams are designed to ensure that most candidates do very well. In order to equate different test versions, the shield score boundaries are set so that all candidates’ results relate to the same scale of achievement. This means, for example, that the shield 4 boundary may be set at a slightly different raw score across versions.For more information about Statements of Results go to https://www.cambridgeenglish.org/exams-and-tests/exam-results-for-young-learners/cambridgeenglish.org/exams-and-tests/exam-results-for-young-learnersSpecial requirementsCambridge English exams are designed to be fair to all participants.For more information about special requirements go to https://www.cambridgeenglish.org/help/special-requirements/.﻿Official Cambridge English exam preparation materialsTo support teachers and help learners prepare for their exams, we have developed a range of official support materials including coursebooks and practice tests. These official materials are available in both print and digital formats.http://cambridge.org/eltSupport for teachers, parents and learnersWe provide a wealth of user-friendly, https://www.cambridgeenglish.org/teaching-english/resources-for-teachers/ as well as preparation materials for teachers, parents and learners. These resources include:General information – handbooks for teachers, sample papers.Detailed exam information – format, timing, number of questions, task types, mark scheme of each paper.Advice for teachers – developing students’ skills and preparing them for the exam.Downloadable lessons – a lesson for every part of every paper. Teaching qualifications – a comprehensive range of qualifications for new teachers and career development for more experienced teachers. cambridgeenglish.org/teaching-english/resources-for-teachers/webinars – a wide range of live and recorded webinars for both new and experienced teachers.https://www.cambridgeenglish.org/learning-english/parents-and-children/activities-for-children/ All resources and materials can be found on each level’s preparation page:Pre A1 Starters: https://www.cambridgeenglish.org/exams-and-tests/starters/preparation/A1 Movers: https://www.cambridgeenglish.org/exams-and-tests/movers/preparation/A2 Flyers: https://www.cambridgeenglish.org/exams-and-tests/flyers/preparation//Registering candidates for an examThe exams are available on paper (on demand).Exam entries must be made through an authorised Cambridge English exam centre. Centre staff have all the latest information about our exams, and can provide you with:• details of entry procedures• copies of the exam regulations• exam dates• current fees• more information about Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers and other Cambridge English Qualifications.We have more than 2,800 centres in over 130 countries – all are required to meet our high standards of exam administration, integrity, security and customer service. Find your nearest centre at http://www.cambridgeenglish.org/centresearchFurther informationIf your local authorised exam centre is unable to answer your question, please contact our helpdesk:http://www.cambridgeenglish.org/helpExam preparation and supportAbout the examThe three syllabusesThe syllabuses for the three levels follow. They describe the topics, the grammar and structures, the lexis and the tasks on which the exams are based.Considerable care has been taken to reflect the language covered in a wide range of Primary English courses and materials.A guiding principle for the exams is a desire to close the distance between the children’s experiences of learning and of testing. Tasks are intended to test the meaningful use of language in clear, relevant, accessible contexts. Children must know what to expect when they sit down to take the exams, so we publish the full vocabulary list, and grammar and structures lists. Teachers should familiarise children with the exam format whilst continuing their normal teaching programmes, and concentrate on teaching through a focus on meaning and context.In general, the language input to the exams is likely to be of a standard British English variety, although care is taken to avoid terms which might cause confusion for learners of American English. Some American English terms are included in the vocabulary lists. Versions of the Listening test contain both British and American accents. In terms of a candidate’s output, both standard British English and standard American English are equally acceptable.The three levelsThe aims of the Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers exams are to:• sample relevant and meaningful language use• measure accurately and fairly• present a positive first impression of international exams• promote effective learning and teaching• encourage future learning and teaching.The three exams together form a bridge to take children learning English as a second language from beginner to basic user level (A2). They are fun, colourful and activity based, motivating children to learn.A wide range of textbooks and teaching materials which are used in classrooms with young learners throughout the world are reviewed as part of the ongoing exam development process. The table on the next page indicates the common characteristics and variations in the different levels.OVERALL LENGTHNUMBER OF TASKS/PARTSNUMBER OF ITEMSPre A1 StartersListeningapprox 20 mins420Reading and Writing20 mins525Speaking 3-5 mins4-TOTALapprox 45 minsA1 MoversListeningapprox 25 mins525Reading and Writing30 mins635Speaking 5-7 mins4-TOTALapprox 1 hour 2 minsA2 FlyersListeningapprox 25 mins525Reading and Writing40 mins744Speaking 7-9 mins4-TOTALapprox 1 hour 14 minsCan Do summaryThe tables below give some examples at each level of typical general ability. These statements are linked to the CEFR.Pre A1 StartersLISTENING AND SPEAKING READING AND WRITING CAN understand letters of the English alphabet when heardCAN read and understand some simple sentences, including questionsCAN understand some simple spoken instructions given in short, simple phrasesCAN follow some very short stories written in very simple languageCAN understand some simple spoken questions about self – such as name, age, favourite things or daily routineCAN write the letters of the English alphabetCAN understand some very simple spoken descriptions of people – such as name, gender, age, mood, appearance or what they are doingCAN write name using the English alphabetCAN understand some very simple spoken descriptions of everyday objects – such as how many, colour, size or locationCAN copy words, phrases and short sentencesCAN understand some very short conversations that use familiar questions and answersCAN spell some very simple words correctlyCAN name some familiar people or things – such as family, animals, and school or household objectsCAN give very basic descriptions of some objects and animals – such as how many, colour, size or locationCAN respond to very simple questions with single words or a ‘yes/no’ responseA1 MoversLISTENING AND SPEAKING READING AND WRITING CAN understand very simple spoken dialogues about familiar topics with the help of picturesCAN understand some simple signs and noticesCAN understand very simple spoken descriptions about people and objectsCAN read and understand some short factual texts with the help of picturesCAN express agreement or disagreement with someone using short, simple phrasesCAN read and understand some short, simple stories about familiar topics with the help of picturesCAN respond to questions on familiar topics with simple phrases and sentencesCAN write short, simple phrases and sentences about pictures and familiar topicsCAN give simple descriptions of objects, pictures and actionsCAN write simple sentences giving personal detailsCAN tell a very simple story with the help of picturesCAN write short, simple sentences about likes and dislikesCAN ask someone how they are and ask simple questions about habits and preferencesA2 FlyersLISTENING AND SPEAKING READING AND WRITING CAN understand instructions given in more than one sentenceCAN understand simple written descriptions of objects, people and eventsCAN understand simple spoken descriptions of objects, people and eventsCAN understand simple, short stories containing narrative tensesCAN understand simple conversations on everyday topicsCAN read and understand short texts, even if some words are unknownCAN ask basic questions about everyday topicsCAN link phrases or sentences with connectors like ‘and’, ‘because’ and ‘then’CAN tell short, simple stories using pictures or own ideasCAN write simple descriptions of objects, pictures and actionsCAN give simple descriptions of objects, pictures and actionsCAN write a short, simple story using pictures or own ideasCAN talk briefly about activities done in the pastPre A1 StartersTasksThe Tasks pages give information about the exam format and what is tested in each part of the paper. Preparing learnersThe Preparing learners pages give information and advice a bout what teachers can do to prepare their learners. There are also links to useful websites to find additional materials. You’ll find suggested strategies to help learners perform to the best of their ability on the day..Grammar and structures listContentsPaper 1: Listening13 Tasks14 Preparing learnersPaper 2: Reading and Writing 19 Tasks20 Preparing learnersPaper 3: Speaking 25 Tasks26 Preparing learners 29 Grammar and structures listPre A1 Starters Grammar and structures listGrammar and Structures ListSee the thematic vocabulary lists on page 77 for a comprehensive list of words in each category.EXAMPLES Nouns Singular and plural including irregular plural forms, countable and uncountable and names Would you like an orange? Lemons are yellow. Pat has six mice. I eat rice for lunch. Nora is my friend. Adjectives Including possessive adjectives He’s a small boy. His name is Yusef. Determiners It’s a banana. This is an apple. Put the hat on the boy’s head. I want some milk. These books are blue. Pronouns Including demonstrative, personal, and possessive interrogative pronouns and ‘one’ This is my car. Can you see me? Which is Anna? Yes, please. I’d like one. This is mine! Is that yours? Verbs (Positive, negative, question, imperative and short-answer forms, including contractions) Present simpleNick is happy. I don’t like eggs. Eat your lunch! Is that your sister? Yes, it is. Present continuous (not with future reference) What are you doing? The cat’s sleeping. Can for ability The baby can wave. Can for requests/permissionCan I have some birthday cake?Have (got) for possession Have you got a pen? She hasn’t got a dog.Adverbs I’m colouring it now. My grandma lives here. She lives here too.Conjunctions I’ve got a pen and a pencil. Prepositions of place and time Put the clock next to the picture. We go to school in the morning. Question words Who is that man? Where is Alex?Impersonal you How do you spell that?Have + obj + infLucy has a book to read. ing forms as nounsSwimming is good.Grammar and Structures List 29Paper 3Paper 1:Pre A1 Starters Listening tasksAbout 20 minsPARTNUMBER OF QUESTIONSNUMBER OF MARKSTASK TYPESWHAT DO CANDIDATES HAVE TO DO?155MatchingDraw lines to match names to people in a picture.255Note-takingWrite numbers and names in gaps.3553-option multiple choiceTick correct box under pictures.455ColouringCarry out instructions, locate objects, and colour correctly. (Range of colours is: black, blue, brown, green, grey, orange, pink, purple, red, yellow)TOTAL2020Tips for preparing learners for the Listening paper  It is important to make sure that children can understand the spoken and written forms of all the words on the Pre A1 Starters wordlist. When preparing tasks, test writers keep strictly to the vocabulary and grammatical structures so that children who have been carefully prepared will be familiar with all the language they hear or read on the day of their test. The vocabulary to be tested was selected with young learners in mind and focuses on words relevant to young children’s experiences of the world, such as animals, toys, home, school and children’s leisure activities.  Familiarise the children with spoken forms of British and American English. The recordings use a range of adults and children speaking clearly in standard British and American English. At Pre A1 Starters level speakers speak moderately slowly. Encourage the children to look carefully at the pictures and to think about what they are illustrating. Make sure that children know that they will hear each recording twice. Quick links to resourcesParentshttp://cambridgeenglish.org/parentsTeachershttp://www.cambridgeenglish.org/starters/prepareAdvice by taskListening Part 1Listening part 1 illustration4 Cambridge English: Young LearnersStarters Listening3Part 1–5 questions –Listen and draw lines. There is one example. Sue Ann LucyNickPatJillDanTHE TASK fIn this task, candidates look at a picture which shows people doing different things. Above and below are people’s names. Candidates listen to a dialogue between an adult and a child and draw lines from the names to the correct person in the picture.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fDo plenty of practice with describing people in pictures: their hair, their clothes and what they are doing. fMake sure that candidates know which first names on the vocabulary lists are male and which are female. Note that Alex, Kim, Pat and Sam may be used to refer either to a boy or to a girl. fTell candidates to draw straight lines from each name to its person – this will be much less confusing for them when they are checking their work during the second hearing of the recording. It doesn’t matter if their lines cross over each other and cross other people in the picture as long as it is clear which person each line leads to. fMake sure children understand that there is one extra name which they do not have to use. They should not assume that that name is the name of the extra person in the picture and should only draw lines according to the instructions that they hear.  fEncourage candidates to read the names round the picture before they hear the recording so that they know which names they are listening for.ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for names and descriptions.Listening Part 2THE TASK fThis is a simple note-taking exercise, in which candidates hear a conversation between a child and an adult. There is one picture to set the context, and a comprehension question for each item. Each answer is either a name or a number. The numbers dictated can be written as digits or words. All names are spelled out letter by letter, and must be spelled correctly for the mark to be awarded.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fMake sure that learners know what is expected of them in this task. They should appreciate that they only need to write a name or a number in answer to each question. Anything candidates have to write will be clearly heard twice.  fNames which candidates are required to write will be spelled out for them. All the names come from the Pre A1 Starters vocabulary list. Candidates therefore need plenty of practice in the letters of the alphabet, paying particular attention to the vowels and the ‘difficult’ consonants, such as G and J.  fWhere a number is required, candidates should be encouraged to write numbers as digits rather than words to avoid spelling mistakes. Candidates will only hear numbers 1–20 so they need plenty of practice in hearing and recognising each of those numbers. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for numbers and spellings.Listening part 2 illustration Starters 5Starters Listening4Part 2– 5 questions –Read the question. Listen and write a name or a number.There are two examples.ExamplesWhat is the new girl’s name? Kim..................................How old is the new girl? 8..................................Listening Part 3Listening part 3 illustration Starters 7Starters Listening6Part 3– 5 questions –Listen and tick () the box. There is one example.What animal has Alex got in his bedroom? A B C 1 Which picture are May and Sam looking at? A B C 2 What are Mrs Good’s class doing this afternoon? A B C THE TASK fThis task consists of five questions, each a 3-option multiple choice with pictures. Candidates listen to the information conveyed in five separate dialogues in which the speakers are clearly differentiated by age or gender. Candidates listen and tick the correct picture. HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fCandidates are allowed time to look at the pictures before they hear the dialogues. Encourage them to look carefully at the pictures and to think about what they are illustrating.  fTrain candidates to listen to the whole of each dialogue as the answer may well be provided in several parts of the dialogue rather than just one turn. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for specific information of various kinds.Listening Part 4Listening part 4 illustration Starters 9Starters Listening8Part 4– 5 questions –Listen and colour. There is one example.THE TASK fThis is a test of lexis, particularly names of colours, and prepositions of place. There is one large picture, and in it there are a number of examples of the same object. The candidate has to identify a certain object by listening to details of its position, and then colour it in correctly. The information is given in a dialogue between an adult and a child.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fEnsure that candidates know they should bring coloured pencils or pens to the test. Make sure that candidates are familiar with the names of the colours that they are expected to know at this level.  fMake sure candidates understand what is expected of them in this part of the test. They have to identify which one of the seven similar objects in the picture is being described and colour that object in the right way. They should not colour anything else in the picture except the objects that they are told to colour. fReassure them that this is an English test and not a test of their colouring skills. They should focus on what they hear rather than worrying about how well they are colouring.ASSESSMENT fThe part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for words, colours and prepositions.Paper 2:Pre A1 Starters Reading and Writing tasks20 minsPARTNUMBER OF QUESTIONSNUMBER OF MARKSTASK TYPESWHAT DO CANDIDATES HAVE TO DO?155True/false vocabulary recognitionTick or cross to show if sentence is true or false.255Reading comprehension based on a pictureWrite ‘yes’/’no’ to show if sentence is correct or not.355SpellingWrite words by unscrambling the letters.455Multiple-choice clozeChoose and copy missing words.555Answer questions based on a picture storyWrite one-word answers to questions.TOTAL2525Tips for preparing learners for the Reading and Writing paper  As is appropriate for young learners, Pre A1 Starters Reading and Writing tasks are supported by pictures. It is therefore useful to make plenty of use of pictures when preparing candidates for the test. Give candidates practice in matching words for lexical items to pictures. It is also helpful to practise matching sentences to pictures. You could, for example, ask learners to read texts which describe scenes and then to draw the picture according to the information in the text.  It is similarly useful to do exercises comparing and contrasting different structures and vocabulary related to pictures, for example, prepositions such as in and on, the present continuous tense, different sports, etc. Concentrate on words which are likely to be confused, e.g. photo/camera, or which have ‘false friends’ in the candidates’ first language.  Longer tasks are mainly based on simple stories. Give children as much opportunity as possible to read and enjoy stories at their level. Test writers keep to the Pre A1 Starters word and structure lists when preparing tasks. Make sure children learn the vocabulary, grammar and structures in the Pre A1 Starters syllabus. In this way all the language that they see in the test will be known to them. Write difficult or less common words up on the classroom walls so that candidates become very familiar with them.  Vocabulary can be revised and reinforced in a way that children will find fun by using language puzzles and simple word games. Children often lose marks because they do not write letters and/or words clearly enough. Remind candidates to check that what they have written is legible for someone who is not familiar with their handwriting. It is often better not to use joined-up writing, as letters can become confused and unclear.  Candidates should be told to write only as much as they need to. Children often lose marks because they attempt long answers which provide more opportunities for making mistakes.  Children should be encouraged to spell correctly. Reinforce candidates’ knowledge of common letter patterns in English – ea, ck, ight, ou, er, etc.  Because young candidates are unlikely to have had much experience managing their time in an exam, it can be helpful when doing classroom tasks to give them a time limit, both to improve concentration and to prevent them being distracted by other things. Quick links to resourcesParentshttp://cambridgeenglish.org/parentsTeachershttp://www.cambridgeenglish.org/starters/prepareAdvice by taskCandidates should practise these exam strategies regularly in class.Reading and Writing Part 1Reading and writing part 1 illustration16 Cambridge Assessment EnglishPre A1 Starters Reading and Writing2Part 1– 5 questions –Look and read. Put a tick (✔) or a cross (✘) in the box.There are two examples.Examples These are grapes. ✔ This is a house. ✘Questions1 This is a helicopter. CER_2063_7Y12_Young_Learners_Sample_papers_volume_1.indd 1611/01/2018 11:06THE TASK fIn this task the candidate reads sentences. There are five statements, each accompanied by a picture, and the candidate has to place a tick in a box if the statement matches the picture, and a cross if it does not. The pictures show either singular or plural objects.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fEncourage candidates to read the sentences and look at the pictures very carefully (at least twice), and make sure they know that the mark they put in the box must be an unambiguous tick or a cross – if it looks as if it could be either, they will lose the mark.  fWhen introducing new words to candidates, make sure they can distinguish between related words that are commonly confused (e.g. sock/shoe).  fGive candidates practice in marking sentences with ticks or crosses to indicate whether they are true or false. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to recognise the meaning of words, by relating them to visuals.Reading and Writing Part 2Reading and writing part 2 illustration18 Cambridge English: Young LearnersStarters Reading & Writing4Part 2– 5 questions –Look and read. Write yes or no.Examples There are two armchairs in the living room. yes............................... The big window is open. no...............................Questions1 The man has got black hair and glasses. ...............................2 There is a lamp on the bookcase. ...............................3 Some of the children are singing. ...............................4 The woman is holding some drinks. ...............................5 The cat is sleeping under an armchair. ...............................THE TASK fCandidates look at a picture and five statements, some of which correctly describe the picture and some which do not. Candidates write ‘yes’ or ‘no’ as appropriate.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fMake sure that candidates are very familiar with action verbs that they are likely to come across in this section (run, ride, walk, play, throw, sing, etc.).  fMake sure they realise that if any element of the sentence is false, then they must write ‘no’, even if there is an element which is true, for example: The woman is throwing the ball to the girl. The woman must be both throwing the ball and throwing it to the girl for a ‘yes’ answer. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to read and comprehend text at sentence level.Reading and Writing Part 3Reading and writing part 3 illustration Starters 19Starters Reading & Writing5Part 3– 5 questions –Look at the pictures. Look at the letters. Write the words.ExampleQuestions12345snakeksanekcudnmykekicehncpihpsoumeooTHE TASK  fThis is a test of knowledge of words and spelling. There are five pictures of objects, each accompanied by the word for the object given as jumbled letters. The candidate must write the word for each object. Dashes indicate the number of letters in the answer. HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fChildren should have practice in writing all the words in the Pre A1 Starters vocabulary list.  fGive children plenty of spelling exercises, using words from the list.  fRemind candidates that they must only use the letters provided when doing this part.  fPractise by doing anagram puzzles with children in class. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to produce vocabulary at single-item level, with the support of visuals and scrambled letters.Reading and Writing Part 4Reading and writing part 4 illustration20 Cambridge English: Young LearnersStarters Reading & Writing6Part 4– 5 questions –Read this. Choose a word from the box. Write the correct word next to numbers 1–5. There is one example.LizardsLots of lizards are very small animals........................... but some are really big.Many lizards are green, grey or yellow. Some like eating (1).......................... and some like eating fruit.A lizard can run on its four (2)......................... and it has a long(3).......................... at the end of its body.Many lizards live in (4).......................... but, at the beach, you can find some lizards on the (5).......................... . Lizards love sleeping in the sun! ExampletreessandballoonteachertailspiderslegsanimalsTHE TASK fCandidates read a factual or semi-factual text and look at the words with pictures in a box below the text. They copy the correct words into each of the five gaps. All missing words are singular or plural nouns. There are two extra words which candidates should not use.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fCandidates should be encouraged to read holistically to get a sense of the text before trying to answer questions.  fPractice in guessing which word could go into each gap would be extremely useful. Candidates can then confirm their guesses by seeing, and choosing from, the options underneath the text.  fRemind children that each answer is only one word, and must make sense in the story. It must also fit grammatically. Therefore, give candidates plenty of practice matching pictures and words and mixing up plurals and singulars to encourage them to be alert to these distinctions. Also, help them to identify words or grammatical forms that will indicate whether an answer should be plural or not, e.g. if a gap is preceded by a. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to comprehend a short text. It also tests their receptive lexical knowledge.Reading and Writing Part 5Reading and writing part 5 illustration Starters 21Starters Reading & Writing7Part 5– 5 questions –Look at the pictures and read the questions. Write one-word answers.Examples Where are the people? in the kitchen............................... How many children are there? two...............................Questions1 What are the children some toy ............................... playing with?THE TASK fA story is told through three pictures, with five questions, each of which requires a one-word answer. The correct word may be a noun, verb or number.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fTrain candidates to learn the correct spelling of Pre A1 Starters words.  fDo exercises which encourage careful reading.  fFrequent question words like where and when are often misinterpreted or confused in Part 5, so do exercises which encourage quick, accurate reading so that question words are correctly identified and understood.  fCandidates should practise answering questions with single words, with the emphasis on selecting key information.ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to answer questions summarising a picture story. It also tests their productive lexical knowledge.Paper 3:Pre A1 Starters Speaking tasksAbout 3–5 minsPARTTASK TYPESTASK TYPESWHAT DO CANDIDATES HAVE TO DO?1Interlocutor–candidateScene picture and object cardsPoint to correct part of picture.Place object cards on the scene picture as directed.2Interlocutor–candidateScene pictureAnswer questions with short answers including a ‘Tell me about …’ question.3Interlocutor–candidateObject cardsAnswer questions with short answers.4Interlocutor–candidatePersonal questionsAnswer questions with short answers.Tips for preparing learners for the Speaking paper  One way of making the test as stress free as possible is that the child is first met by an usher who explains the format of the test in the child’s first language before taking him or her into the test room to meet the examiner.  The standard format for the Speaking test is one child and one examiner. The pictures and questions used in the test are all based on the vocabulary and structures in the Pre A1 Starters lists. This means that children who have been taught using the lists will be familiar with all the language they need in order to do well.  The format of the test always follows the same pattern so that children who are well prepared will not receive any surprises. Use English to give everyday classroom instructions so that children become very familiar with instructions like Look at … , Give … , Put … , Find …, Tell me … Children create a good impression when they use greetings and other social formulae confidently. Make sure they are happy using Hello, Goodbye and Thank you, and that they have plenty of practice at using Sorry, or I don’t understand whenever this is appropriate.  Quick links to resourcesParentshttp://cambridgeenglish.org/parentsTeachershttp://www.cambridgeenglish.org/starters/prepareAdvice by taskSpeaking Part 1Speaking part 1 illustration A1 Movers 27A1 Movers Listening26 Cambridge Assessment EnglishPre A1 Starters Speaking Centre Number Candidate Number Movers Listening There are 25 questions. You have 20 minutes. You will need a pen or pencil. My name is: .................................................................... Copyright © UCLES 2018 STARTERSSPEAKING. Scene pictureTEST ONE26 Cambridge English: Young LearnersDownload the audio files for the sample paper here: cambridgeenglish.org/movers-audio-sample-v1THE TASK fThe examiner greets the candidate and checks the candidate’s name. This part is unassessed. fThe examiner starts the test by demonstrating what is required and then asks the child to point to objects on the scene picture. fThe examiner asks the candidate to point to two object cards and gives instructions to place them in different locations on the scene picture.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fChildren should practise identifying people, animals and things in different pictures by pointing in response to questions such as: Where’s the chair? Where are the bananas? fCandidates should also practise placing smaller pictures in different positions on a larger picture in response to instructions such as: Put the robot next to the chair. Put the carrot on the table.  fCandidates should not worry if the required position (of, for example, the cake) does not seem to be a very appropriate one! ASSESSMENT  fThis part tests understanding and following spoken instructions.Speaking Part 2Speaking part 2 illustration A1 Movers 27A1 Movers Listening26 Cambridge Assessment EnglishPre A1 Starters Speaking Centre Number Candidate Number Movers Listening There are 25 questions. You have 20 minutes. You will need a pen or pencil. My name is: .................................................................... Copyright © UCLES 2018 STARTERSSPEAKING. Scene pictureTEST ONE26 Cambridge English: Young LearnersDownload the audio files for the sample paper here: cambridgeenglish.org/movers-audio-sample-v1THE TASK fThe examiner asks the candidate some questions about the scene picture.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fCandidates should practise answering simple questions about a picture (with one-word answers). For example: What’s this? (plate) How many plates are there? (four)  fCandidates should also practise responding to ‘Tell me about’ questions with simple sentences, such as What’s the man doing? (reading) Tell me about the boat. (it’s blue/red. It’s on the floor.) fPractise with both large pictures showing scenes and single pictures showing one object or person.ASSESSMENT fThis part tests understanding and following spoken instructions.Speaking Part 3Speaking part 3 illustrationPre A1 Starters 25Pre SpeakingPre A1 Starters SpeakingStarters 1/7 1/6 1/5 1/4 1/3 1/2 1/1 1/8 1/7 1/6 1/5 1/4 1/3 1/2 1/1 1/8 1/7 1/6 1/4 1/3 1/2 1/8 1/7 1/6 1/4 1/3 1/2 1/8 1/7 1/6 1/5 1/4 1/3 1/2 1/1 1/8 1/7 1/6 1/5 1/4 1/3 1/2 1/1 1/8 1/7 1/6 1/4 1/3 1/2 1/8 1/7 1/6 1/4 1/3 1/2 1/8 THE TASK fThe examiner asks the candidate questions about four of the object cards.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fCandidates should practise answering simple questions about a picture (with one-word answers). For example: What’s this? (crocodile) What colour is it? (green) What’s your favourite animal? (cat)  fPractise with both large pictures showing scenes and single pictures showing one object or person.ASSESSMENT fThis part tests understanding and following spoken questions.Speaking Part 4THE TASK fThe examiner asks the candidate some personal questions on topics such as age, family, school and friends.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fIn Part 4, candidates need to feel confident that they can give basic information about themselves and can answer questions such as: How old are you? What’s your friend’s name? Is your house/apartment big or small? Can you play table tennis? What’s your favourite colour/animal/sport/food?ASSESSMENT fThis part tests understanding and responding to personal questions.Grammar and Structures ListSee the thematic vocabulary lists on page 79 for a comprehensive list of words in each category.EXAMPLES Nouns Singular and plural including irregular plural forms, countable and uncountable and names Would you like an orange? Lemons are yellow. Pat has six mice. I eat rice for lunch. Nora is my friend. Adjectives Including possessive adjectives He’s a small boy. His name is Yusef. Determiners It’s a banana. This is an apple. Put the hat on the boy’s head. I want some milk. These books are blue. Pronouns Including demonstrative, personal, and possessive interrogative pronouns and ‘one’  This is my car. Can you see me? Which is Anna? Yes, please. I’d like one. This is mine! Is that yours? Verbs (Positive, negative, question, imperative and short-answer forms, including contractions) Present simpleNick is happy. I don’t like eggs. Eat your lunch! Is that your sister? Yes, it is. Present continuous (not with future reference) What are you doing? The cat’s sleeping. Can for ability The baby can wave. Can for requests/permissionCan I have some birthday cake?Have (got) for possession Have you got a pen? She hasn’t got a dog.Adverbs I’m colouring it now. My grandma lives here. She lives here too.Conjunctions I’ve got a pen and a pencil. Prepositions of place and time Put the clock next to the picture. We go to school in the morning. Question words Who is that man? Where is Alex?Impersonal you How do you spell that?Have + obj + infLucy has a book to read. ing forms as nounsSwimming is good.EXAMPLES Let’sLet’s go to the zoo!Like + v + ingI like swimming. There is/There are There is a monkey in the tree. There are some books on the table. Would like + n or vI would like some grapes.Would you like to colour that ball?Happy birthday!You’re eight today! Happy Birthday! Here you areWould you like an apple? Yes, please. Here you are. Me too!I like football. Me too. So do II love hippos. So do I. Story about + ingThis is a story about playing football. What (a/an) + adj + nWhat a good dog!What beautiful fish!What now?Put the egg in the box. OK! The egg is in the box. What now? A1 MoversTasksThe Tasks pages give information about the exam format and what is tested in each part of the paper.Preparing learnersThe Preparing learners pages give information and advice about what teachers can do to prepare their learners. There are also links to useful websites to find additional materials. You’ll find suggested strategies to help learners perform to the best of their ability on the day.Grammar and structures listContentsPaper 1: Listening33 Tasks34 Preparing learnersPaper 2: Reading and Writing 39 Tasks40 Preparing learnersPaper 3: Speaking 47 Tasks48 Preparing learners 52 Grammar and structures listA1 Movers Grammar and structures listGrammar and Structures List The list below details what is new at A1 Movers level. Candidates will be expected to know everything on this list in addition to the list at Pre A1 Starters level. See the thematic vocabulary lists on page 77 for a comprehensive list of words in each category.EXAMPLES Indirect objectsGive it to the teacher!Comparative and superlative adjectivesYour house is bigger than mine.Anna is my best friend.Verbs(Positive, negative, question, imperative and short-answer forms, including contractions)Past simple regular and irregular formsWe went to the park yesterday.Her father cooked lunch on Friday.Did you go to the cinema? Yes, I did.We didn’t see the pirate at the party.Verb + infinitiveI want to go home.He started to laugh.Verb + ingI went riding on Saturday.Infinitive of purposeShe went to town to buy a toothbrush.Want/ask someone to do somethingHe wants the teacher to tell a story.Must for obligationHe must do his homework.You mustn’t give the rabbit cheese.Must I get up now?Have (got) to/had toI’ve got to go.Do I have to go to bed now?He had to draw a whale for homework.Shall for offersShall I help you wash the car, Mum?Could (past form of can)I could see some birds in the tree.AdverbsShe never eats meat.He sang loudly.My mother talks a lot.Comparative and superlative adverbsMy brother reads more quickly than my sister.I like ice cream best.ConjunctionsI went home because I was tired.Prepositions of timeShe plays with her friends after school.He plays badminton on Saturdays.Question wordsWhy is he talking to her?When does school start?Relative clausesVicky is the girl who is riding a bike.That is the DVD which my friend gave me.This is the house where my friend lives.What is/was the weather like?What was the weather like last weekend?52Paper 1:A1 Movers Listening tasksAbout 25 minsPARTNUMBER OF QUESTIONSNUMBER OF MARKSTASK TYPESWHAT DO CANDIDATES HAVE TO DO?155MatchingDraw lines to match names to people in a picture.255Note-takingWrite words or numbers in gaps.355MatchingMatch pictures with illustrated word or name by writing letter in box.4553-option multiple choiceTick correct box under pictures.555Colouring and writingCarry out instructions, locate objects, colour correctly and write. (Range of colours is: black, blue, brown, green, grey, orange, pink, purple, red, yellow)TOTAL2525Paper 1Tips for preparing learners for the Listening paper  It is important to make sure that children can understand the spoken and written forms of all the words on the Pre A1 Starters and A1 Movers wordlists. When preparing tasks, test writers keep strictly to the vocabulary and grammatical structures so that children who have been carefully prepared will be familiar with all the language they hear or read on the day of their test. The vocabulary to be tested was selected with young learners in mind and focuses on words relevant to young children’s experiences of the world, such as animals, toys, home, school and children’s leisure activities.  Familiarise the children with spoken forms of British and American English. The recordings use a range of adults and children speaking clearly in standard British and American English.  Encourage the children to look carefully at the pictures in the test and to think about what they are illustrating. Make sure that children know that they will hear each recording twice. Quick links to resourcesParentshttp://cambridgeenglish.org/parentsTeachershttp://cambridgeenglish.org/movers/prepareAdvice by taskListening Part 1Listening part 1 illustration28 Cambridge English: Young LearnersMovers Listening2Part 1– 5 questions –Listen and draw lines. There is one example.Ben Sally Nick KimJane Paul Mary2THE TASK fIn this task, candidates look at a picture which shows people doing different things. Above and below are people’s names. Candidates listen to a dialogue between an adult and a child and draw lines from the names to the correct person in the picture. HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fEnsure that candidates realise that there is one extra name on the page which will not be mentioned. They should not aim to connect all seven names to a person in the picture.  fMake sure that candidates know which first names on the vocabulary lists are male and which are female. Note that Alex, Kim, Pat and Sam may be used to refer either to a boy or to a girl.  fTrain candidates to listen for all the information that they are given about a particular person. They should not jump to conclusions after hearing one piece of information, as usually some further information will be required in order to identify the correct person.ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for names and descriptions.Listening Part 2Listening part 2 illustration Movers 29Movers Listening3Part 2– 5 questions –Listen and write. There is one example.12345 trainGoing to zoo today by: ......................................Name of zoo: Jungle ............................Number of different kinds of animals: ...................................... Can give food to: ...................................... Animal food in store next to: ......................................Food on train: ............... and lemonadeGoing to the zooTHE TASK fThis is a note-taking exercise in which candidates listen to a conversation between an adult and a child and write a word or a number next to five short prompts on a form or page of a notepad. Some misspellings will be allowed for words which are not spelled out on the recording.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fChildren often find this part of the A1 Movers Listening test challenging. Practise by doing similar productive tasks in the classroom.  fEncourage candidates to be as accurate as possible in their spelling of the words on the Pre A1 Starters and A1 Movers vocabulary lists.  fEnsure that candidates realise that they have to write responses which make sense, given the prompts on the question paper. They should look at these prompts carefully and think about what they mean before listening to the recording.  fOne of the questions may involve them writing a word that is spelled for them, so carry on practising spelling in English. There is often – though not always – a question where the answer is a number, so make sure children are confident with numbers up to 100 in English.ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for names, spellings and other information.Listening Part 3Listening part 3 illustration30 Cambridge English: Young LearnersMovers ListeningPart 3– 5 questions –Mrs Castle is telling Sally, about the people in her family and about their different hobbies. Which is each person’s favourite hobby?Listen and write a letter in each box. There is one example.her parentsHher uncleher sonher cousinher brotherher daughter4THE TASK fCandidates listen to a conversation which is mainly led by one speaker. They match a list of illustrated words or names with a set of pictures by writing the letter of the correct picture in a box.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fChildren have to match a picture from the right-hand page with one on the left-hand page. For example, they may have to match a picture to the person who took that picture or an activity to the place where someone did that activity. Reading the introductory question above the pictures on the left-hand page before listening to the recording will help children to understand what the specific task is about. fMake sure children realise that they will not hear information about the pictures in the order in which they appear on the page. Pictures on both the left and right-hand pages will be mentioned in random order.  fThere are two extra pictures on the right-hand page. These pictures will be referred to in the dialogues but do not answer the question. It is important, therefore, to listen and understand the whole of the dialogue rather than just identifying individual words.ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for words, names and detailed information.Listening Part 4Listening part 3 illustration32 Cambridge English: Young LearnersMovers Listening6Part 4– 5 questions –Listen and tick (✓) the box. There is one example.What is the DVD about? A ✓ B C 1 Who is Vicky’s piano teacher? A B C 2 What clothes does Nick want to wear at school today? A B C THE TASK fThis task consists of five questions, each a 3-option multiple choice with pictures. Candidates listen to five dialogues in which the speakers are clearly differentiated by age or gender. Candidates listen and tick the correct picture.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fMake sure that candidates appreciate that they must listen to the whole dialogue, before deciding on their answer.  fOften quite a wide range of vocabulary is covered in this part of the test. Candidates must be familiar with all the words in the Pre A1 Starters and A1 Movers vocabulary lists, in order to be sure of achieving full marks. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for specific information of various kinds.Listening Part 5Listening part 4 illustration34 Cambridge English: Young LearnersMovers ListeningPart 5– 5 questions –Listen and colour and write. There is one example.8THE TASK fThis task consists of a dialogue in which an adult asks a child to colour different things in a picture, and write a simple word. Candidates listen to the dialogue and follow the instructions.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fMake sure that children know exactly what they have to do. In Part 5, they will have to colour various objects and write one word in the space indicated. They will not be expected to colour particularly well. They simply have to show that they have understood the instructions correctly. This includes not doing anything that they are not asked to do. So make sure children know they should only colour what they are told to colour. fEnsure that candidates understand that they do not only have to colour at A1 Movers level; they will also have to write something for one of the questions in this part of the test. It will not be a difficult word and there will be something in the picture that makes it a logical word to write.  fTrain candidates to listen carefully for prepositional phrases which describe exactly where something is (e.g. the bag behind the chair or the towel under the desk).ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for words, colours and specific information.Paper 2:A1 Movers Reading and Writing tasks30 minsPARTNUMBER OF QUESTIONSNUMBER OF MARKSTASK TYPESWHAT DO CANDIDATES HAVE TO DO?155Matching words to definitionsCandidates read short definitions and match them to the correct words. Each word is represented by a labelled picture. Candidates are required to copy the correct word next to the definition.266Short dialogue with multiple-choice responsesCandidates read a short dialogue and complete it by choosing the correct responses. They must choose from three options (A, B and C) for each question.366Gapped textCandidates read a short narrative and choose the correct word to complete the gaps. Candidates are also asked to choose the best title for the story from a choice of three options.455Multiple-choice clozeCandidates read and understand a gapped factual text. They are asked to choose the correct word from a choice of three to complete each gap.577Sentence completion based on a storyCandidates read a story and complete sentences about it by writing one, two or three words.6610Productive writingCandidates complete sentences, provide a written response to questions and write sentences about a picture.TOTAL3539Tips for preparing learners for the Reading and Writing paper  As is appropriate for young learners, A1 Movers Reading and Writing tasks are supported by pictures. It is therefore useful to make plenty of use of pictures when preparing candidates for the exam. Give candidates practice in matching lexical items to pictures. It is also helpful to practise matching sentences to pictures. You could, for example, ask learners to read texts which describe scenes and then to draw the picture according to the information in the text.  It is similarly useful to do exercises comparing and contrasting different structures and vocabulary related to pictures, for example, prepositions such as in and on, the present continuous tense, different sports, etc. Concentrate on words which are likely to be confused, e.g. photo/camera, or which have ‘false friends’ in the candidates’ first language.  Longer tasks are mainly based on simple stories. Give children as much opportunity as possible to read and enjoy stories at their level. Test writers keep to the Pre A1 Starters and A1 Movers word and structure lists when preparing tasks. Make sure children learn the vocabulary, grammar and structures in the Pre A1 Starters and A1 Movers syllabuses. In this way all the language that they see in the exam will be known to them. Write difficult or less common words up on the classroom walls so that candidates become very familiar with them.  Vocabulary can be revised and reinforced in a way that children will find fun by using language puzzles and simple word games. Children often lose marks because they do not write letters and/or words clearly enough. Remind candidates to check that what they have written is legible for someone who is not familiar with their handwriting. It is often better not to use joined-up writing, as letters can become confused and unclear.  Candidates should be told to write only as much as they need to. Children often lose marks because they attempt long answers which provide more opportunities for making mistakes.  Children should be encouraged to spell correctly. Reinforce candidates’ knowledge of common letter patterns in English – ea, ck, ight, ou, er, etc.  Because young candidates are unlikely to have had much experience managing their time in an exam, it can be helpful when doing classroom tasks to give them a time limit, both to improve concentration and to prevent them being distracted by other things. Quick links to resourcesParentshttp://cambridgeenglish.org/parentsTeachershttp://cambridgeenglish.org/movers/prepareAdvice by taskCandidates should practise these exam strategies regularly in class.Reading and Writing Part 1Reading and writing part 1 illustration42 Cambridge English: Young LearnersMovers Reading & Writing2Part 1– 5 questions –Look and read. Choose the correct words and write them on the lines. There is one example.an islanda sandwicha banda citya nursea driverteaa fieldTHE TASK fIn this task, candidates match words and definitions. There are eight pictures, each with the words that they illustrate written under them, and five definitions (refer to page 43 of the Sample papers volume 1). Candidates copy the correct words next to the definitions. There is one example.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fGive children practice in reading and writing definitions of items from the Pre A1 Starters and A1 Movers vocabulary list. Ensure candidates are familiar with the structures and vocabulary commonly used in defining things, such as you with general reference (e.g. You can find books or do your homework in this place), relative pronouns and infinitives used to express purpose.  fCandidates should practise accurate copying, but remind them to copy the whole option and not to add anything extra. This means including the article if there is one, and not adding one if there isn’t one. Once they have written the answer, they should check that they have spelled the word correctly. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to match words to their meaning.Reading and Writing Part 2Reading and writing part 2 illustrationLearnersMovers Reading & Writing4Part 2– 6 questions –Read the text and choose the best answer.Example Paul: What did you do last night, Daisy? Daisy: A I watched television. B I’m watching television. C I don’t watch television.Questions1 Paul: Did you see the film about pirates? Daisy: A Yes, so do I. B Yes, it was great. C Yes, that’s him.THE TASK fIn this task, candidates read a short written dialogue, for which three different responses are given for what the second speaker says in their turn. Candidates choose the correct response by circling letters.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fRemind candidates to read all the options before choosing the best and most appropriate one. Practise appropriate responses, not just to questions, but also to statements.  fGive plenty of practice with the use of set (formulaic) expressions and with short ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answers.  fGive plenty of practice, too, with multiple-choice questions to encourage candidates to understand the differences between the options in meaning, grammar, sense and appropriacy. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s knowledge of functional language.Reading and Writing Part 3Sample questions46 Cambridge English: Young LearnersMovers Reading & Writing6Part 3–6 questions –Read the story. Choose a word from the box. Write the correct word next to numbers 1–5. There is one example.Jane loves reading about different animals in her school library...................... .Last Friday, Jane’s teacher told the class to find pictures of animals. ‘Look on the (1)........................... I told you about yesterday,’ shesaid. ‘Work with a friend. Choose a really strong animal but talk about your different (2)........................... first.’Jane worked with Paul. ‘Bears are great,’ Paul said. ‘Let’s find a picture of a bear in a river. They’re really good at catching fish! Or a lion? People are (3)........................... of those. Let’s find a picture of a lion with itsmouth open! I like seeing its big teeth.’ ‘What about kangaroos?’ Jane said. ‘They have longer and stronger tails than bears or lions. It’s their tails that make them really good at (4)........................... ! Their back legs are the strongest, too.’Paul looked at Jane. ‘OK! You’re right again, Jane!’ he said. ‘You’re the (5)........................... girl in the class!’THE TASK  fCandidates read a text with five gaps, and look at nine words and pictures in a box (refer to page 47 of the Sample papers volume 1). They then copy the correct words into each of the five gaps. The missing words are nouns, adjectives or verbs (present and past tense). There are four extra words which candidates should not use. fCandidates choose the best title for the story from a choice of three.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fCandidates should be encouraged to read the whole text to get a general idea of what it is about before trying to complete the first gap. Make sure candidates realise that they need to read the text surrounding the question to be able to correctly fill the gap. Practice in guessing which word could go into each gap without looking at the options is also useful. Candidates can then confirm their guesses by seeing, and choosing from, the options on the facing page.  fAlso, practise choosing the right form of words (plural/singular nouns, adjectives, verbs) within sentences and texts. Help candidates to identify words or structures that will indicate what form of word the answer should be. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to read for specific information and for gist.Reading and Writing Part 4Reading and writing part 4 illustration48 Cambridge English: Young LearnersMovers Reading & Writing8Part 4– 5 questions –Read the text. Choose the right words and write them on the lines.DolphinsDolphins are part of............................ the whale family. They are smaller ............................. most whales and they have small teeth.Dolphins are very clever animals. They learn things very ............................. and a dolphin can make noises to ‘talk’ to another dolphin.Dolphins live with their families. They like to play in the water and to jump ............................. of the water and back in again.A lot of people ............................. sail boats say that dolphins like to be near people. They come very near to boats and sometimes they ............................. with the boats for days.Example12345THE TASK fIn this task, candidates read a factual text which contains five gaps (refer to page 49 of the Sample papers volume 1). fThey choose the correct word from a choice of three and copy the correct words into the gaps (refer to page 49 of the Sample papers volume 1). This task has a grammatical focus.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fAs with Part 3, children should practise choosing and forming the correct type of word (nouns, adjectives, verbs) to fit into sentences and texts.  fShow candidates that they do not need to think of a word for each gap themselves – they must just choose from the three options given. Remind them to be careful to check that they have chosen a word from the correct set of options. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to read and understand a factual text. It also tests their lexical and grammatical knowledge.Reading and Writing Part 5Reading and writing part 5 illustration50 Cambridge English: Young LearnersMovers Reading & Writing10Part 5– 7 questions –Look at the pictures and read the story. Write some words to complete the sentences about the story. You can use 1, 2 or 3 words.Daisy at the farmDaisy’s family lived in a flat in the city, but every weekend they drove to the countryside to see Daisy’s grandparents. They lived on a farm. In the car, last Saturday, the family talked about the farm. ‘It’s so quiet there!’ Daisy’s Mum said.‘I like working outside!’ her father said.‘I love helping Grandpa with all the animals,’ Daisy said. ‘Look! Here we are!’Examples Daisy’s home was in the city................................. . Daisy’s family went to the countryside................................. by car every weekend. Questions1 Daisy’s mother liked the farm because it was a ........................... place.2 Daisy enjoyed working with ................................. on the farm.mumTHE TASK  fCandidates read a story and complete sentences about it, using one, two or three words. The story is divided into three sections, each with an illustration. The pictures do not provide answers to the questions.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fRemind candidates that the pictures are there to support the story, although they do not provide the answers to the questions. Useful practice can be gained from predicting an outline of the story from the three pictures and the title. However, it must be remembered that the answers should always be found in the texts. Practice in reading for gist is useful, as are tasks aimed at understanding whole texts, for example, selecting titles for paragraphs or complete stories.  fGive candidates practice in finding synonyms/alternatives for nouns, identifying what is being referred to in a text, how nouns can be replaced with pronouns, and how sentences can be turned around whilst retaining their meaning (e.g. On Friday the family ate breakfast in the garden can become The family ate breakfast in the garden on Friday). Children do not have to produce vocabulary or grammatical structures that are not in the text, but must ensure that the words they choose to complete the sentence frames are grammatically correct. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to read and understand a story. It also tests their ability to recognise different words and phrases with similar meanings.Reading and Writing Part 6Reading and writing part 6 illustration54 Cambridge English: Young LearnersMovers Reading & Writing14Part 6– 6 questions –Look and read and write.Examples The dog is playing in some water................................. . What’s the mother wearing? a purple shirt................................. .THE TASK fCandidates complete sentences, answer questions and write full sentences about a picture.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fIn Questions 1 and 2, candidates are asked to complete the sentences by writing a word or short phrase. In Questions 3, 4, 5 and 6 they are asked to produce longer chunks of text; phrases or sentences in Questions 3 and 4; and sentences in Questions 5 and 6.  fChildren should try to write as carefully and clearly as possible. fChildren should write different sentences for Questions 5 and 6. Two identical or virtually identical sentences here will result in a maximum score of 1 (rather than 2) for Question 6. fChildren should check their answers carefully. If they want to make corrections, they should do so as neatly and clearly as they can.ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s productive writing skills and their ability to communicate meaning through written English.Movers Part 6, sample answers with marks and commentariesReading and writing part 6 illustration54 Cambridge Assessment EnglishA1 Movers Reading and Writing14Part 6– 6 questions –Look and read and write.Examples The dog is playing in some water................................. . What’s the mother wearing? a purple shirt................................. .CER_2063_7Y12_Young_Learners_Sample_papers_volume_1.indd 5411/01/2018 11:06A total of 10 marks are available for this part.QUESTIONSCORE1 and 2• Candidates can score a maximum of 1 mark for each of Questions 1 and 2. • 1 mark is awarded for a response that provides an accurate representation of the picture.3–6• Candidates can score a maximum of 2 marks for each of Questions 3–6.• 1 mark is available for a response which is comprehensible.• 1 mark is available for a response which is an accurate representation of the picture.• Candidates are expected to write two different sentences for Questions 5 and 6.Sample answersQuestion 1Complete the sentenceThe boy on the bike is wearing grey table.Examiner comments 0 marksThis response scores zero since it is not an accurate representation of the picture.Question 2Complete the sentenceOne dog is brown and one dog is black and whiteExaminer comments 1 markThis response scores 1 mark since it is an accurate reflection of what is shown in the picture.Question 3What’s the girl in the black skirt doing?Riding a bikeExaminer comments 1 markThis response is awarded 1 mark since it is comprehensible but it does not provide an accurate representation of the picture.Question 4Where are the flowers?The flowers are under the treeExaminer comments 2 marksThis response is awarded 2 marks since it is both comprehensible and it accurately reflects what’s happening in the picture.Questions 5 and 6Now write two sentences about the picture.5. The brown dog are playing in the water.6. There is a table and chair in the garden.Examiner comments 2 marksResponses to Questions 5 and 6 would each be awarded a score of 2 marks since they are both comprehensible and true to the picture. The focus is on communicative success, and therefore grammatical errors, such as verb agreement, which do not impede communication (see response to Question 5), will not affect a candidate’s score in A1 Movers Part 6.Paper 3:A1 Movers Speaking tasksAbout 5–7 minsPARTTASK TYPESTASK TYPESWHAT DO CANDIDATES HAVE TO DO?1Interlocutor–candidateTwo similar picturesIdentify four differences between pictures.2Interlocutor–candidatePicture sequenceDescribe each picture in turn.3Interlocutor–candidatePicture setsIdentify odd one out and give reason.4Interlocutor–candidateOpen-ended questions about candidateAnswer personal questions.Tips for preparing learners for the Speaking paper  One way of making the test as stress free as possible is that the child is first met by an usher who explains the format of the test in the child’s first language before taking him or her into the test room to meet the examiner.  The standard format for the Speaking test is one child and one examiner.  The pictures and questions used in the test are all based on the vocabulary and structures in the Pre A1 Starters and A1 Movers lists. This means that children who have been taught using the lists will be familiar with all the language they need in order to do well.  The format of the test always follows the same pattern so that children who are well prepared will not receive any surprises. Use English to give everyday classroom instructions so that children become very familiar with instructions like Look at … , Tell … , Give … , Put … , Find … Children create a good impression when they use greetings and other social formulae confidently. Make sure they are happy using Hello, Goodbye and Thank you, and that they have plenty of practice at using Sorry, or I don’t understand whenever this is appropriate.  Quick links to resourcesParentshttp://cambridgeenglish.org/parentsTeachershttp://cambridgeenglish.org/movers/prepareAdvice by taskSpeaking Part 1Speaking part 1 illustration58 Cambridge English: Young LearnersMovers SpeakingMOVERS SPEAKING. Find the Differences THE TASK fThe examiner greets the candidate and asks the candidate for their name and age. fThe examiner then demonstrates what is required and shows the candidate two pictures which look similar, but have some differences. The examiner then asks the candidate to describe four differences.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fFor Part 1, candidates should practise describing differences between two similar pictures. The differences may be related to colour, size, number, position, appearance, activity, etc. For example: Here it is sunny, but here it is cloudy. Here there are four fish, but here there are five. The bottles are behind the rock here, but in front of the rock here. The girl is playing with a ball in this picture, but in this one she is playing with a boat. Although the above represent examples of ideal responses, something much simpler is acceptable. For example: Here red and here yellow. This is boy and this is girl. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests describing pictures.Speaking Part 2Speaking part 2 illustration Movers 59Movers Speaking4321MOVERS SPEAKING. Picture Story TEST ONE3FredFred loves foodTHE TASK fThe examiner shows the candidate a sequence of four pictures which show a story. The examiner tells the candidate the name of the story and describes the first picture in the story. They then ask the candidate to describe the other three pictures. The title of the story and the name(s) of the main character(s) are shown on the story.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fPart 2 in the A1 Movers Speaking test requires candidates to tell a simple story based on four pictures. Candidates will benefit from practice in telling simple picture stories. Note that examiners are not looking for evidence of storytelling skills. Candidates are only expected to say a few words about each picture in the sequence without necessarily developing these comments into a narrative.  fBefore asking candidates to tell the story, the examiner says, ‘Look at the pictures first.’ Advise candidates to look at each picture in turn to get a general idea of the story before they start to speak. However, they should not worry if they cannot follow the narrative of the picture story. It is perfectly acceptable just to say a few words about each picture in the sequence. The examiner will prompt by asking a question if a candidate needs help.  fThe structures candidates will need most frequently in this task are There is/are, the present tense of the verbs be and have (got), the modals can/can’t and must/mustn’t and the present continuous tense of some action verbs (for example: play, read, look at, write, laugh, go). They should be able to say things like The man is talking. The children are eating. Candidates should also be able to describe simple feelings, for example: The boy is/isn’t happy. The examiner will prompt by asking a question if a candidate needs help. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests describing things and events.Speaking Part 3Speaking part 3 illustration60 Cambridge English: Young LearnersMovers Speaking60 Cambridge English: Young LearnersMOVERS SPEAKING. Odd-one-out THE TASK fThe examiner shows the candidate four sets of four pictures where one picture in each set is the ‘odd one out’. The candidate has to identify which picture is the odd one out in the remaining three sets and say why.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fFor Part 3, children should practise identifying the different one in a set of four pictures – for example, a picture of a book among three pictures of different fruits, a picture of a girl buying something among three pictures of people painting, a picture of a small animal/fish among three pictures of animals and a picture of a boy swimming among three pictures of people washing things. Candidates are only expected to give simple reasons for choosing a picture as the different one. For example: These are fruit, this isn’t. These people are painting, but this girl is buying bread. This fish is small, but these are all big. This boy is swimming, but these people are washing.  fThere may be many different ways of expressing the same difference. Candidates may also find an alternative difference to the one intended. This is perfectly acceptable provided they give a reason for their choice. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests describing pictures.Speaking Part 4THE TASK fThe examiner asks the candidate some personal questions on topics such as school, weekends, friends and hobbies.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fFinally, for Part 4, make sure candidates feel confident answering questions about themselves, their families and friends, their homes, their school and free time activities, their likes and dislikes. They should be able to answer questions such as: Who do you play with at school? What games do you play at school? What do you have for lunch?  fOnly simple answers of between one and four words are expected. Questions will normally be in the present tense, but candidates should also be prepared to use the past tense and answer questions about, for example, what they did last weekend.ASSESSMENT fThis part tests understanding and responding to personal questions.Grammar and Structures List The list below details what is new at A1 Movers level. Candidates will be expected to know everything on this list in addition to the list at Pre A1 Starters level. See the thematic vocabulary lists on page 79 for a comprehensive list of words in each category.EXAMPLES  Indirect objectsGive it to the teacher!Comparative and superlative adjectivesYour house is bigger than mine.Anna is my best friend.Verbs(Positive, negative, question, imperative and short-answer forms, including contractions)Past simple regular and irregular formsWe went to the park yesterday.Her father cooked lunch on Friday.Did you go to the cinema? Yes, I did.We didn’t see the pirate at the party.Verb + infinitiveI want to go home.He started to laugh.Verb + ingI went riding on Saturday.Infinitive of purposeShe went to town to buy a toothbrush.Want/ask someone to do somethingHe wants the teacher to tell a story.Must for obligationHe must do his homework.You mustn’t give the rabbit cheese.Must I get up now?Have (got) to/had toI’ve got to go.Do I have to go to bed now?He had to draw a whale for homework.Shall for offersShall I help you wash the car, Mum?Could (past form of can)I could see some birds in the tree.AdverbsShe never eats meat.He sang loudly.My mother talks a lot.Comparative and superlative adverbsMy brother reads more quickly than my sister.I like ice cream best.ConjunctionsI went home because I was tired.Prepositions of timeShe plays with her friends after school.He plays badminton on Saturdays.Question wordsWhy is he talking to her?When does school start?Relative clausesVicky is the girl who is riding a bike.That is the DVD which my friend gave me.This is the house where my friend lives.What is/was the weather like?What was the weather like last weekend?EXAMPLES What’s the matter?What’s the matter, Daisy? Have you got a stomach-ache?How/What about + n or ingHow about going to the cinema on Wednesday afternoon?When clauses (not with future meaning)When he got home, he had his dinner.Go for a + nYesterday we went for a drive in my brother’s new car.Be called + nA baby cat is called a kitten.Be good at + nShe’s very good at basketball.I think/know ...I think he’s very nice.A2 FlyersTasksThe Tasks pages give information about the exam format and what is tested in each part of the paper.Preparing learnersThe Preparing learners pages give information and advice about what teachers can do to prepare their learners. There are also links to useful websites to find additional materials. You’ll find suggested strategies to help learners perform to the best of their ability on the day.Grammar and structures listContentsPaper 1: Listening57 Tasks58 Preparing learnersPaper 2: Reading and Writing 63 Tasks64 Preparing learnersPaper 3: Speaking 73 Tasks74 Preparing learners 77 Grammar and structures listA2 Flyers Grammar and structures listGrammar and Structures List The list below details what is new at A2 Flyers level. Candidates will be expected to know everything on this list in addition to the lists at Pre A1 Starters and A1 Movers levels. See the thematic vocabulary lists on page 77 for a comprehensive list of words in each category.EXAMPLES Verbs(Positive, negative, question, imperative and short-answer forms, including contractions)Past continuous (for interrupted actions and background setting)I was walking down the road when I saw her.It was a very cold day and snow was falling.Present perfectHave you ever been to the circus?He’s just eaten his dinner.Be going toIt isn’t going to rain today.WillWill you do your homework this evening?I won’t buy her a CD because she doesn’t like music.MightVicky might come to the party.MayThe bus may not come today because there is a lot of snow.Shall for suggestionsShall we have a picnic in the park?CouldYou could invite Robert to the football game.ShouldShould we take a towel to the swimming pool?Tag questionsThat’s John’s book, isn’t it?AdverbsI haven’t bought my brother’s birthday present yet.ConjunctionsI didn’t want to walk home so I went on the bus.If clauses (in zero conditionals)If it’s sunny, we go swimming.Where clausesMy grandmother has forgotten where she put her glasses.Before/after clauses (not with future reference)I finished my homework before I played football.Be/look/sound/feel/taste/smell likeWhat’s your new teacher like?That sounds like the baby upstairs. I think he’s crying.Make somebody/something + adjThat smell makes me hungry!What time …?What time does the film start?What else/next?What else shall I draw?See you soon/later/tomorrow etc.See you next week, Mrs Ball!Be made ofThe toy is made of wood.Grammar and Structures List 77Paper 3Paper 3Paper 1:A2 Flyers Listening tasksAbout 25 minsPARTNUMBER OF QUESTIONSNUMBER OF MARKSTASK TYPESWHAT DO CANDIDATES HAVE TO DO?155MatchingDraw lines to match names to people in a picture.255Note-takingWrite words or numbers in gaps.355MatchingMatch pictures with illustrated word or name by writing letter in box.4553-option multiple choiceTick correct box under pictures.555Colouring and writingCarry out instructions, locate objects, colour correctly and write. (Range of colours is: black, blue, brown, green, grey, orange, pink, purple, red, yellow)TOTAL2525Tips for preparing learners for the Listening paper  It is important to make sure that children can understand the spoken and written forms of all the words on the Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers wordlists. When preparing tasks, test writers keep strictly to the vocabulary and grammatical structures so that children who have been carefully prepared will be familiar with all the language they hear or read on the day of their test. The vocabulary to be tested was selected with young learners in mind and focuses on words relevant to young children’s experiences of the world, such as animals, toys, home, school and children’s leisure activities.  Familiarise the children with spoken forms of British and American English. The recordings use a range of adults and children speaking clearly in standard British and American English.  Encourage the children to look carefully at the pictures in the test and to think about what they are illustrating. Make sure that children know that they will hear each recording twice. Quick links to resourcesParentshttp://cambridgeenglish.org/parentsTeachershttp://cambridgeenglish.org/flyers/prepareAdvice by taskListening Part 1Listening part 1 illustration62 Cambridge English: Young LearnersFlyers Listening2Part 1– 5 questions –Listen and draw lines. There is one example.Sally Harry JaneWilliam David Sarah RichardTHE TASK fIn this task, candidates look at a picture which shows people doing different things. Above and below are people’s names. Candidates listen to a dialogue between speakers clearly differentiated by age or gender and draw lines from the names to the correct person in the picture.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fEncourage candidates to spend the time they are given to look at the picture before the questions and to start by thinking about how each of the characters might be described. They should be aware that they will have to focus on language that points to the differences between two similar people in the picture. fMake sure that candidates know which first names on the vocabulary lists are male and which are female. Note that Alex, Kim, Pat and Sam may be used to refer either to a boy or to a girl. fThe language that candidates need for this task is that which is used not only for describing people’s clothes and physical appearance, but also for commenting on what they are doing. Practice in describing a range of pictures and photos containing people is, therefore, likely to help candidates do well in this part of the test. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for names and descriptions.Listening Part 2THE TASK fThis is a note-taking exercise in which candidates listen to a conversation between two speakers and write a word or a number next to five short prompts on a form or page of a notepad. Some misspellings will be allowed for words which are not spelled out on the recording.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fGive candidates as much practice as possible with this kind of productive task, as candidates sometimes find note-taking difficult.  fMake sure that candidates understand the meanings of, and are also able to spell correctly, the words in the Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers vocabulary lists.  fEven at A2 Flyers level, candidates often seem uncertain about the names of some letters of the alphabet in English. Clearly the more practice that can be given here the better. ASSESSMENT fThe part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for names, spellings and other information.Listening Part 3Listening part 3 illustration64 Cambridge English: Young LearnersFlyers Listening4Part 3– 5 questions –Where did Uncle Robert get each of these things?Listen and write a letter in each box. There is one example.PaintingEDrumsSwanFanChocolatesGloves4THE TASK fCandidates listen to a conversation which is mainly led by one speaker. They match a list of illustrated words or names with a set of pictures by writing the letter of the correct picture in a box.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fMake sure candidates read the introductory question at the head of the task, which sets the context, and gives the instructions. This should help them to understand what they are being asked to do.  fEncourage candidates to listen carefully to the dialogue and understand exactly what is said. They should remember that speakers will talk about the two pictures on the right-hand page which are not correct, as well as those that are. Candidates should therefore not assume that the first picture that is mentioned is the right answer. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for words, names and detailed information.Listening Part 4Listening part 4 illustration66 Cambridge English: Young LearnersFlyers Listening6Part 4– 5 questions –Listen and tick (✓) the box. There is one example.What was Grandma’s favourite job? A ✓ B C 1 Which museum is Jack’s grandma going to work in? A B C 2 What does Jack enjoy doing most in museums? A B C THE TASK fThis task consists of five questions, each a 3-option multiple choice with pictures. Candidates listen to five separate dialogues in which the speakers are clearly differentiated by age or gender. Candidates listen and tick the correct picture.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fThis part of the test covers a wide range of the grammar and vocabulary appropriate to this level. Teachers should make sure that the structures and vocabulary listed in the syllabus have been well covered in class.  fIt is also very important that candidates listen to the whole of the dialogue before choosing their answer. They should be aware that the correct answer to each individual question may be given at any point in the dialogue and is not necessarily the last thing mentioned. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for specific information of various kinds.Listening Part 5Listening part 5 illustration68 Cambridge English: Young LearnersFlyers Listening8Part 5– 5 questions –Listen and colour and write. There is one example.THE TASK fThis task consists of a dialogue in which an adult asks a child to colour different things in a picture and write two simple words. Candidates listen to the dialogue and follow the instructions.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fAs with all parts of this test, make sure that children know exactly what they have to do. In Part 5, they will have to write two words in the places they are told as well as to colour various objects. They will not be expected to colour particularly well. They simply have to show that they have understood the instructions correctly. This includes not doing anything that they are not asked to do. So make sure children know they should only colour what they are told to colour. fFor this task, children will need to demonstrate that they can understand language which distinguishes between two similar but slightly different objects or people. This may be a matter of understanding language which explains precisely where someone or something is, or it may be a matter of understanding language explaining how two people or things differ from one another. Practice in handling this sort of descriptive language will therefore help candidates to deal with this part of the test.  fCandidates should be aware that this task is perhaps more challenging than it appears and should ensure that they listen to the instructions very carefully.ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to listen for words, colours and specific information.Paper 2:A2 Flyers Reading and Writing tasks40 minsPARTNUMBER OF QUESTIONSNUMBER OF MARKSTASK TYPESWHAT DO CANDIDATES HAVE TO DO?11010Matching words to definitionsCandidates read definitions and choose and copy the correct word next to them.255Continuous dialogue with multiple-choice responsesCandidates must complete a continuous dialogue by choosing the correct response (A–H) for the second speaker.366Gapped textCandidates read a short narrative and choose the correct word to complete the gaps. Candidates are also asked to choose the best title for the story from a choice of three options.41010Multiple-choice clozeCandidates read and understand a gapped factual text. They are asked to choose the correct word from a choice of three to complete each gap.577Sentence completion based on a storyCandidates read a story and complete sentences about it by writing one, two, three or four words.655Open clozeCandidates read a short text (e.g. a page from a diary or an email) and complete the gaps with their own words. No answer options are given.715Productive writingCandidates write a short story based on three pictures.TOTAL4448Tips for preparing learners for the Reading and Writing paper  As is appropriate for young learners, A2 Flyers Reading and Writing tasks are supported by pictures. It is therefore useful to make plenty of use of pictures when preparing candidates for the test. Give candidates practice in matching lexical items to pictures.  It is similarly useful to do exercises comparing and contrasting different structures and vocabulary related to pictures, for example, prepositions such as in and on, the present continuous tense, different sports, etc. Concentrate on words which are likely to be confused, e.g. photo/camera, or which have ‘false friends’ in the candidates’ first language.  Longer tasks are mainly based on stories. Give children as much opportunity as possible to read and enjoy stories at their level. Test writers keep to the Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers word and structure lists when preparing tasks. Make sure children learn the vocabulary, grammar and structures for all Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers syllabuses. In this way all the language that they see in the test will be known to them. Write difficult or less common words up on the classroom walls so that candidates become very familiar with them. Occasionally there may be words in texts which do not appear on the wordlist, but these will be glossed and are never tested. Vocabulary can be revised and reinforced in a way that children will find fun by using language puzzles and simple word games. Children often lose marks because they do not write letters and/or words clearly enough. Remind candidates to check that what they have written is legible for someone who is not familiar with their handwriting. It is often better not to use joined-up writing, as letters can become confused and unclear.  Candidates should be told to write only as much as they need to. Children often lose marks because they attempt long answers which provide more opportunities for making mistakes.  Children should be encouraged to spell correctly. Reinforce candidates’ knowledge of common letter patterns in English – ea, ck, ight, ou, er, etc.  Because young candidates are unlikely to have had much experience managing their time in an exam, it can be helpful when doing classroom tasks to give them a time limit, both to improve concentration and to prevent them being distracted by other things. Quick links to resourcesParentshttp://cambridgeenglish.org/parentsTeachershttp://cambridgeenglish.org/flyers/prepareAdvice by taskCandidates should practise these exam strategies regularly in class.Reading and Writing Part 1Reading and writing part 1 illustration A2 Flyers 77A2 Flyers Reading and Writing3Part 1– 10 questions –Look and read. Choose the correct words and write them on the lines.There is one example.This person can fly to the moon in a rocket. ....................... an astronaut1 This is made from fruit and you can put it on your bread with a knife. .......................2 Players in this game throw, catch and hit the ball on a sports field. .......................3 These have pictures on them and you can write on the back and send them to friends when you’re on holiday. .......................4 It is this person’s job to write about news in a newspaper. .......................5 You buy these and put them on your envelopes before you post them. .......................6 This person flies a plane and usually wears a uniform. .......................7 People like reading these because they have stories with pictures or photos on their pages. .......................8 You can play this game inside on ice or outside on a field. .......................9 Some people like this in their tea or coffee and they put it in with a spoon. .......................10 People don’t usually play this game in teams. They use a small, hard white ball. .......................an astronauta pilotgolfsugarhockeymagazinesbaseballpostcardssaltbasketballjamstampsa journalistlettersa photographerTHE TASK fIn this task there are 15 words and 10 definitions. The words are not illustrated. Candidates match words to the corresponding definition by writing the correct words. HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fHelp candidates become familiar with vocabulary in a particular area of lexis (see thematic vocabulary lists at the back of this handbook) and practise distinguishing between words on the vocabulary list that are similar, or commonly confused.  fEncourage candidates to read all the options before they answer the questions, so that they become aware of all the different related words.  fTell candidates to make sure they read the whole sentence carefully before answering.  fRemind them to be careful when copying their answers; many candidates lose marks by leaving out articles, adding unnecessary articles, or by misspelling them. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to match words to their meaning.Reading and Writing Part 2Reading and writing part 2 illustration78 Cambridge English: Young LearnersFlyers Reading & Writing4Part 2– 5 questions –Katy is going to go with her Aunt Emma to her office today. Katy is asking Emma some questions about her work. What does Emma say?Read the conversation and choose the best answer.Write a letter (A–H) for each answer.You do not need to use all the letters. There is one example.Example Katy: Emma, is it time to go to your office? E Emma: ..............................................Questions1 Katy: Do you always walk to work? Emma: ..............................................2 Katy: How many people work there? Emma: ..............................................3 Katy: Where do you eat your lunch? Emma: ..............................................4 Katy: Can I play on the computer in your office? Emma: ..............................................5 Katy: What time do you come home? Emma: ..............................................THE TASK fCandidates read a dialogue in which the second speaker’s responses are missing. There is a list of possible responses for the second speaker, lettered A–H (refer to page 79 of the Sample papers volume 1). Candidates select the appropriate response in each case and write the letter in the gap. There are two responses which do not fit the dialogue.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fRemind candidates to read all the alternatives before choosing the correct one. There may initially appear to be more than one correct alternative, but an understanding of discourse features and referencing will provide the correct answer.  fPractise appropriate responses, not just to questions, but also to statements.  fGive candidates plenty of practice in using the set (formulaic) expressions in the vocabulary lists, and with short ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answers.  fGive candidates practice in choosing appropriate responses, by giving them prompts or questions of the kind found in this part and asking them to predict responses, before giving them the options.  fSpend plenty of time establishing which words in the response refer back to the first speaker’s words and therefore indicate a correct answer. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s knowledge of functional language.Reading and Writing Part 3Reading and writing part 3 illustration80 Cambridge English: Young LearnersFlyers Reading & Writing6Part 3– 6 questions –Read the story. Choose a word from the box. Write the correct word next to numbers 1–5. There is one example.exampleislandfridgepushedrestaurantmissingreadypepperskystormcutLast weekend, Harry and his parents went to a small hotel on an island.................................... in a lake. On Saturday afternoon the hotel cook went by boat to the town to see a friend. But then suddenly a (1) .................................... came, with rain and strong winds, and he couldn’t sail back to the hotel.At six o’clock everyone in the hotel went to the (2) .................................... to have dinner, but it was closed. ‘What’s the matter?’ Harry’s mum asked the waiter. ‘The dinner isn’t (3) .................................... ,’ he said, ‘because there is no-one to cook.’THE TASK fCandidates read a gapped text and look at words in a box above the text. They then copy the correct word into each of the five gaps. The missing words are nouns, adjectives and verbs (present and past tense). fCandidates choose the best title for the story from a choice of three (refer to page 81 of the Sample papers volume 1).HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fCandidates should be encouraged to read the whole text to get a general idea of what it is about before trying to complete the first gap. Lexical and grammatical competence is being tested, so make sure candidates realise that they need to read the text surrounding the question to be able to correctly fill the gap. Practice in guessing which word, and which kind of word, could go into each gap before looking at the options is extremely useful. Candidates can then confirm their guesses by seeing, and choosing from, the options provided.  fGive candidates practice in choosing the right form of words (plural/singular nouns, adjectives, verbs) within sentences and texts. Help them to identify words or structures that will indicate what kind of word the answer is likely to be, e.g. if the gap is preceded by some, the answer cannot be a countable singular noun.  fMake sure candidates realise that they must copy the options they choose correctly.ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to read for specific information and for gist.Reading and Writing Part 4Reading and writing part 4 illustration82 Cambridge English: Young LearnersFlyers Reading & Writing8Part 4– 10 questions –Read the text. Choose the right words and write them on the lines.The SeasonsIn many...................... countries there are four seasons in the year. These are called spring, summer, autumn and winter. ...................... season is about three months long and then a new season comes.In the north of our planet summer usually ...................... in June. It is the warmest time of the year and it sometimes does not get dark ...................... 10 o’clock at night. In September it gets colder and the trees ...................... their leaves. This season is called autumn. Winter comes in December ...................... it is usually very cold and a lot of countries have snow. On some winter days, it gets dark at about 4 o’clock ...................... the afternoon so the days are very ...................... and the nights are long.In March the weather gets warmer and plants and flowers start to grow ...................... . This season is called spring.In the south of the planet the countries have the ...................... seasons,but they happen at different times ...................... the year. They have summer in December and winter in June.Example12345678910THE TASK fIn this task candidates read a factual text which contains 10 gaps. They choose the correct word from a choice of three and copy the correct words into the gaps (refer to page 83 of the Sample papers volume 1). This task has a grammatical focus.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fAs with Part 3 above, candidates should practise forming and choosing the correct type of word (nouns, adjectives, verbs, etc.) to fit into sentences or texts.  fRemind candidates that the options are given, so it is not necessary to think of a word to fit the space.  fMake sure candidates are familiar with past forms of regular and irregular verbs in the A2 Flyers vocabulary list. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to read and understand a factual text. It also tests their lexical and grammatical knowledge.Reading and Writing Part 5Reading and writing part 5 illustration84 Cambridge English: Young LearnersFlyers Reading & Writing10Part 5– 7 questions –Look at the picture and read the story. Write some words to complete the sentences about the story. You can use 1, 2, 3 or 4 words.Mr Park’s class visit a castlePaul’s class at school are studying castles in history. So last week their history teacher, Mr Park, took them to visit an old castle on a hill next to the sea. They went by bus and stopped at the bottom of the hill.Mr Park pointed to the castle at the top of the hill and said, ‘There is no road up there so we have to walk.’The children were tired and thirsty when they arrived at the castle. But Mr Park had juice for all of them. It was very interesting because Mr Park showed them all the different parts of the castle and explained its history.On the way down the hill Paul’s friends said, ‘Let’s have a race.’ So Paul and his friends started to run.‘Stop running!’ shouted Mr Park. But the boys ran faster and faster and then Paul fell over and hurt his leg. It wasn’t broken, but he couldn’t walk very well.Mr Park saw a farmer on his horse in a field. He went to speak to him and the farmer let Paul ride his big brown horse down the hill to the bus.‘Sorry we didn’t listen to you on the hill,’ Paul said to Mr Park, ‘but we listened in the castle. It was great! Can we come again?’THE TASK fCandidates read a story and complete sentences about it, using one, two, three or four words (refer to page 85 of the Sample papers volume 1). There is one text and one picture. The picture provides context for the story but does not provide answers to the questions. HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fUseful practice for candidates can be gained from identifying lexis in, and establishing what is happening in, a picture. Candidates can then be given longer texts to read based around the picture.  fIn order to understand the story, give candidates practice in identifying different ways of referring to people or objects (e.g. John, he, him, Paul’s brother), and how sentences can be turned around whilst retaining their meaning (e.g. Last Sunday, our family went to the park to have a picnic can become Our family had a picnic in the park last Sunday). Also, practice in identifying what is being referred to in a text, especially the meaning of pronouns and adverbs such as here and there, will be useful.  fRemind candidates to copy the spelling correctly when taking words from the text. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to read and understand a story. It also tests their ability to recognise different words and phrases with similar meanings.Reading and Writing Part 6Reading and writing part 6 illustration86 Cambridge English: Young LearnersFlyers Reading & Writing12Example12345Part 6– 5 questions –Read the diary and write the missing words. Write one word on each line.We are having...................... a great time on this holiday. Today we’ve been ...................... visit the pyramids. My teacher told me about them in our Geography ...................... and she showed us some pictures of them, but in the pictures they looked much smaller ...................... they are. We went inside one and I ...................... lots of photos with my camera.We are going to go and see some camels tomorrow. I am very excited ...................... I have always wanted to ride one. Mum doesn’t want to go near them. She says camels are usually not very friendly.THE TASK fCandidates read a gapped text in the form of, for example, a diary or a letter. Candidates write one word in each of the five gaps. There is no list of words for candidates to choose from. Both lexis and grammar are tested in this task. HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fGive candidates plenty of practice in using common collocations such as ask a question, do some homework, etc.  fMost learners find it helpful to read the whole text to get a sense of what it is about before attempting to write anything in the gaps. fAs with all gap-fill tasks, candidates should practise choosing words which fit the surrounding text both lexically and grammatically. Make sure they do not just consider the text immediately before and/or after the gap. Their choice of a correct answer may depend on something said further back or further ahead in the text. fEncourage candidates to self-edit, making sure they re-read the whole text through to check their answers. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests the candidate’s ability to read and understand a short text, and to produce appropriate words to complete each gap. It tests their knowledge of both structures and lexis, including collocations and fixed expressions.Reading and Writing Part 7Reading and writing part 7 illustration Flyers 87Flyers Reading & Writing13Part 7Look at the three pictures. Write about this story. Write 20 or more words. ....................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................THE TASK fCandidates write a short story based on three pictures.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fThey should write more than 20 words, but they should be discouraged from writing too many words, i.e. going on to the next page, as writing more means they are more likely to make language mistakes. Candidates can write below the lines, if they need to, but quality should be encouraged over quantity. fChildren should spend time looking at the pictures first in order to understand the story. They should then write one or two sentences about each picture and consider how they can connect the events happening in picture 1 to those happening in pictures 2 and 3.  fChildren can write their stories using past tenses. For example: An astronaut arrived on a strange planet. He talked to an alien. Alternatively, they can use present continuous forms as if they are describing the picture. For example: An astronaut is arriving on a strange planet. He is talking to an alien. fTell children to check their sentences carefully after they have written them. If they want to make corrections, they should do so as neatly as possible. fA total of 5 marks are available for this part.ASSESSMENT fThis tests the candidate’s ability to communicate ideas and to link those ideas, in written English.A2 Flyers Part 7, sample answers with marks and commentaries Beach images Space images 70 SCORE SCORE 5 • Response describes a progression of events which are explicitly connected to each other and • Response is based on all three pictures and • Minimal effort is required on the part of the reader to make sense of the response 4 • Response describes a progression of events, some of which are explicitly connected to each other and • Response is based on all three pictures and • Some effort is required on the part of the reader to make sense of the response 3 • Response describes a progression of events and response addresses at least one of the pictures OR • Response describes a progression of events and addresses all three pictures but imposes a significant strain on the reader, who may be required to read it more than once in order to make sense of it 2 • Response includes at least one phrase that is clearly comprehensible 1 • Response includes some English words discernible by the reader 0 • Question unattempted or totally incomprehensible responseSample answersResponse A (beach images)in Jack is go to in is Jack is father go ball is and doll and shaker Haper stay words in is and china Jack is ball is backfastExaminer comments 1 markThe response includes some English words that the reader is able to understand.Response B (space images)Once upon a time in the space une astronaut come to the Equestria planet and oneExaminer comments 2 marksThe candidate has produced phrases that are comprehensible to the reader (once upon a time; une astronaut come to the Equestria planet). However, without having demonstrated an ability to communicate a progression of events, he/she cannot score higher than 2 marks.Response C (beach images)One day a girly and a boy on the beath play ball. A white whale in the sea. girly and boy it very happy. But the ball throw in the sea, but the white whuleExaminer comments 3 marksThis response successfully describes a progression of events and includes some phrases that are understandable to the reader, but it does not address all three pictures.Response D (beach images)One day Jack and Mary are play bell. Oh! no Jake take the bell into the sea. Great! a fish take the bell to the Mary!Examiner comments 3 marksThis response successfully describes a progression of events, and it does address all three pictures, but it imposes a significant strain on the reader, who is likely to have to read the text more than once in order to make sense of it.Response E (beach images)There are children’s. They playing voleyball but the boy kick the ball to dolphin but friendly dolphin kick the ball back.Examiner comments 4 marksThis response successfully describes a progression of events, and addresses all three of the pictures despite requiring some effort on the part of the reader.Response F (space images)One day there was an astronaut who visited moon he meet an alien. The astronaut was very hungry so he asked the alien for food the alien agreed and he had food with the alien and lived happily ever after.Examiner comments 5 marksThe candidate has described a progression of events and included all three pictures in their response. Minimal strain is imposed on the reader, who would be able to understand the text on first reading.Paper 3:A2 Flyers Speaking tasksAbout 7–9 minsPARTTASK TYPESTASK TYPESWHAT DO CANDIDATES HAVE TO DO?1Interlocutor–candidateTwo similar pictures (one is the examiner’s)Oral statements about examiner’s pictureIdentify six differences in candidate’s picture from statements about examiner’s picture.2Interlocutor–candidateOne set of facts and one set of question cuesAnswer and ask questions about two people, objects or situations.3Interlocutor–candidatePicture sequenceDescribe each picture in turn.4Interlocutor–candidateOpen-ended questions about candidateAnswer personal questions.Tips for preparing learners for the Speaking paper  One way of making the test as stress free as possible is that the child is first met by an usher who explains the format of the test in the child’s first language before taking him or her into the test room to meet the examiner.  The standard format for the Speaking test is one child and one examiner.  The pictures and questions used in the test are all based on the vocabulary and structures in the Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers lists. This means that children who have been taught using the lists will be familiar with all the language they need in order to do well.  The format of the test always follows the same pattern so that children who are well prepared will not receive any surprises. Use English to give everyday classroom instructions so that children become very familiar with instructions like Look at … , Ask … , Give … , Put … , Find … Children create a good impression when they use greetings and other social formulae confidently. Make sure they are happy using Hello, Goodbye and Thank you, and that they have plenty of practice at using Sorry, or I don’t understand whenever this is appropriate. Quick links to resourcesParentshttp://cambridgeenglish.org/parentsTeachershttp://cambridgeenglish.org/flyers/prepareAdvice by taskSpeaking Part 1Speaking part 1 sample illustration 192 Cambridge English: Young LearnersFlyers SpeakingFLYERS SPEAKING. Find the Differences92 Cambridge English: Young LearnersFlyers SpeakingCE_2063_7Y04_P_YLE_sample_papers_booklet_2018_Exams_MH_JJ_Updated.indd 9210/04/2017 15:05Speaking part 1 sample illustration 2 A2 Flyers 93A2 Flyers SpeakingFLYERS SPEAKING. Find the DifferencesTHE TASK fThe examiner greets the candidate and asks for name, surname and age. fThe examiner demonstrates what is required and shows the candidate two pictures which are similar but have some differences. The examiner reads statements about the examiner’s picture. The candidate must look at the candidate’s picture, identify six differences and say how the picture is different.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fFor Part 1, candidates should practise listening to the teacher make a statement about a picture (for example: in my picture, there is a cake), relating that to a picture in front of them, and commenting on the difference: in your picture there are magazines.  fIn the test, differences between the examiner’s statements and the candidate’s picture will relate to things like number, colour, position, appearance, activity, shape, and relative size, etc. For example: In my picture the clock is square but in your picture the clock is round. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests understanding statements and responding with differences.Speaking Part 2Speaking part 1 sample illustration 294 Cambridge English: Young LearnersFlyers SpeakingFLYERS SPEAKING. Information ExchangeRobert’s favourite restaurantNameThe Black CatLike eatingpastaWhereNorth StreetTime / open12 o’clockCheap / expensiveexpensiveSarah’s favourite restaurantName?Like eating?Where?Time / open?Cheap / expensive? Flyers 93Flyers SpeakingCE_2063_7Y04_P_YLE_sample_papers_booklet_2018_Exams_MH_JJ_Updated.indd 9310/04/2017 15:05THE TASK fThe examiner asks the candidate questions about a person, place or object, based on a set of question cues. The candidate responds, using a set of information cues. The candidate then asks the examiner questions based on a set of different question cues.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fCandidates should practise asking and answering questions. For example, in Part 2, they should be able to form simple questions to ask for information about people, things and situations. This will include information about time, place, age, appearance, etc.  fCandidates should be able to ask ‘question-word questions’ using Who, What, When, Where, How old, How many, etc. For example: What is the name of Robert’s favourite restaurant? fThey should also be able to ask ‘Yes/No questions’, for example: Has Harry’s teacher got a car?  fAdditionally, they need to be comfortable asking questions with two options. For example: Is the restaurant cheap or expensive? ASSESSMENT fThis part tests responding to and forming questions.Speaking Part 3Speaking part 3 sample illustration96 Cambridge English: Young LearnersFlyers SpeakingFLYERS SPEAKING. Picture Story12354AnnaNickThe Brave TeacherTHE TASK fThe examiner shows the candidate a sequence of five pictures which show a story. The examiner tells the candidate the name of the story and describes the first picture in the story. They then ask the candidate to describe the other four pictures. The title of the story and the name(s) of the main character(s) are shown on the story.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fThe Part 3 task involves candidates telling a simple story based on five pictures, and candidates will benefit from practice in telling similar simple picture stories. However, examiners are not looking for evidence of storytelling skills. Candidates are only expected to say a few words about each picture in the sequence, without necessarily developing these comments into a narrative.  fBefore asking candidates to tell the story, the examiner says, ‘Just look at the pictures first’. Advise candidates to look at each picture in turn to get a general idea of the story before they start to speak. However, they should not worry if they cannot follow the narrative of the picture story. It is perfectly acceptable just to say a few words about each picture in the sequence without developing these comments into a story. The examiner will prompt by asking a question if a candidate needs help.  fThe structures candidates will need most frequently are there is/are, the present tense of the verbs be and have (got), the modals can/can’t and must/mustn’t and the present continuous tense of some action verbs (for example: come, go, buy, put on, carry, open, laugh). They may also need to use the present perfect tense or going to. They should be able to say things like: Nick and Anne are in the classroom. They are looking out the window.  fCandidates should also be able to describe simple feelings, for example: The teacher is happy. ASSESSMENT fThis part tests describing things and events.Speaking Part 4THE TASK fThe examiner asks the candidate some personal questions on topics such as school, holidays, birthdays, family and hobbies.HOW TO APPROACH THE TASK fMake sure candidates feel confident answering questions about themselves, their families and friends, their homes, their school and free time activities, their likes and dislikes and other topics related to their everyday lives. They should be able to answer questions such as: What time do you get up on Saturday? What do you do on Saturday afternoon?  fSimple answers of a phrase or one or two short sentences are all that is required.  fQuestions will normally be in the present tense but candidates should also be prepared to use the past and present perfect tenses and going to, and to answer questions about, for example, what they did yesterday or are going to do at the weekend.ASSESSMENT fThis part tests understanding and responding to personal questions.Grammar and Structures List The list below details what is new at A2 Flyers level. Candidates will be expected to know everything on this list in addition to the lists at Pre A1 Starters and A1 Movers levels. See the thematic vocabulary lists on page 79 for a comprehensive list of words in each category.EXAMPLES Verbs(Positive, negative, question, imperative and short-answer forms, including contractions)Past continuous (for interrupted actions and background setting)I was walking down the road when I saw her.It was a very cold day and snow was falling.Present perfectHave you ever been to the circus?He’s just eaten his dinner.Be going toIt isn’t going to rain today.WillWill you do your homework this evening?I won’t buy her a CD because she doesn’t like music.MightVicky might come to the party.MayThe bus may not come today because there is a lot of snow.Shall for suggestionsShall we have a picnic in the park?CouldYou could invite Robert to the football game.ShouldShould we take a towel to the swimming pool?Tag questionsThat’s John’s book, isn’t it?AdverbsI haven’t bought my brother’s birthday present yet.ConjunctionsI didn’t want to walk home so I went on the bus.If clauses (in zero conditionals)If it’s sunny, we go swimming.Where clausesMy grandmother has forgotten where she put her glasses.Before/after clauses (not with future reference)I finished my homework before I played football.Be/look/sound/feel/taste/smell likeWhat’s your new teacher like?That sounds like the baby upstairs. I think he’s crying.Make somebody/something + adjThat smell makes me hungry!What time …?What time does the film start?What else/next?What else shall I draw?See you soon/later/tomorrow etc.See you next week, Mrs Ball!Be made ofThe toy is made of wood.Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers thematic vocabulary listsFor the alphabetic list for each exam, visit cambridgeenglish.org/Images/506166-starters-movers-flyers-word-list-2018.pdfyoung-learners-word-listPRE A1 STARTERSA1 MOVERSA2 FLYERSAnimals animalbearbeebirdcatchickencowcrocodiledogdonkeyduckelephantfishfroggiraffegoathippohorsejellyfishlizardmonkeymouse/micepetpolar bear sheep snakespidertailtigerzebrazoobatcagedolphinflykangarookittenlion pandaparrot penguinpuppyrabbitsharksnailwhalebeetlebutterflycamelcreaturedinosaureagleextinctfur insectnestoctopusswantortoisewildwingThe body and the face armbodyeareyefacefoot/feethairhandheadlegmouthnosesmilebackbeardblond(e)curlyfairfatmoustacheneckshoulderstomachthintooth/teethelbowfingerkneetoeClothes bagbaseball capbootsclothesdressglasseshandbaghatjacketjeansshirtshoeshortsskirtsocktrousersT-shirtwearcoathelmetscarfsweaterswimsuitbeltbraceletcostumecrownglovenecklacepajamas (UK pyjamas)pocketpyjamas (US pajamas)ringspotspottedstripestripedsunglassestrainersumbrellauniformColours blackbluebrowncolour (US color)gray (UK grey)greengrey (US gray)orangepink purpleredwhiteyellowgoldsilverspotspottedstripestripedPRE A1 STARTERSA1 MOVERSA2 FLYERSFamily & friends babyboybrotherchild/childrenclassmatecousindadfamilyfatherfriendgirlgrandfathergrandmagrandmothergrandpakidliveman/menmothermumoldperson/peoplesisterwoman/womenyoungauntdaughtergranddaughtergrandparentgrandsongrown-upparentsonunclehusbandmarriedsurnamewifeFood & drink applebananabeanbreadbreakfastburgercakecandy (UK sweet(s))carrotchickenchips (US fries)chocolatecoconutdinnerdrinkeateggfishfoodfries (UK chips)fruitgrapeice cream juicekiwi lemonlemonadelimelunch mangomeatmeatballsmilkonionorangepeapearpiepineapplepotatoricesausagesweet(s) (US candy)tomatowaterwatermelonbottlebowlcheesecoffeecupglasshungrymilkshakenoodles pancakepastapicnicplatesaladsandwichsaucesoupteathirstyvegetablebiscuit (US cookie)buttercerealchopstickscookie (UK biscuit)flourforkhoneyjam knifemealolivespepperpiecepizzasaltsmellsnackspoonstrawberrysugartasteyoghurtHealthcoldcoughcrydentistdoctorearachefallfineheadachehospitalillmatter nursesickstomach-achetemperaturetiredtoothachebandagechemist('s)cutfall overmedicinex-rayPRE A1 STARTERSA1 MOVERSA2 FLYERSThe home apartment (UK flat)armchairbathbathroombedbedroombookcaseboxcamerachairclockcomputercupboarddeskdining roomdolldoorflat (US apartment)flowergardenhallhomehousekitchenlampliving room matmirrorphonepictureradioroomrugsleepsofatabletelevision/TVtoytreeTV/televisionwallwatchwindowaddressbalconybasementblanketdownstairsdreamelevator (UK lift)floor (e.g. ground, 1st, etc.)internetlift (US elevator) messageroofseatshowerstair(s)toothbrushtoothpastetowelupstairswashbrushcombcookercushiondiaryentranceenvelopefridgegatekeyletter (as in mail)ovenscreenshampooshelfsoapstampstepswingtelephoneMaterialspapercardglassgoldmetalplasticsilverwoodwoolNames AlexAliceAnn/AnnaBenBillDanEvaGraceHugo JillKimLucyMark MattMayNickPatSamSueTomCharlieClareDaisyFredJackJaneJimJuliaLily MaryPaulPeterSallyVickyZoeBettyDavidEmmaFrankGeorgeHarryHelenHollyKatyMichaelOliver RichardRobertSarahSophiaWilliamNumbers 1–2021–1001st–20thhundredpair101–1,00021st–31stmillionseveralthousandPRE A1 STARTERSA1 MOVERSA2 FLYERSPlaces & directions behindbetweenbookshopendhereinin front ofonparkplaygroundshop (US store)store (UK shop)streetthereunderzooabovebelowbuildingbus stationbus stopcafécar parkcentre (US center)cinemacirclecircuscity/town centre (US center)farmfunfairhospitallibrary mapmarketnearoppositeplaceshopping centre (US center)sports centre (US center)squarestationstraight supermarketswimming pooltown/city centre (US center)airportbankbridgecastlechemist('s)clubcollegecornereastfactoryfire stationfrontget to hotelkilometre (US kilometer)left (as in direction)Londonmiddle museumnorthoverpathpolice stationpost officerestaurantrightright (as in direction)skyscrapersouthstadiumstraight ontheatre (US theater)universitywaywestSports & leisure badmintonballbaseballbasketballbat (as sports equipment)beachbikeboatbookbouncecameracatch (e.g. a ball)dolldrawdrawingdriveenjoyfavourite (US favorite)fishingflyfootball (US soccer)gameguitar hobbyhockeyjump kickkitelisten musicphotopianopictureplayradioreadriderunsingskateboardskateboardingsoccer (UK football)songsportstoryswimtable tennistake a photo/picturetelevision/TVtennistennis racketthrowtoyTV/televisionwalkwatchband (music)CDcinemacomiccomic bookdancedriveDVDemailfilm (US movie)fishgo shoppinggoalholidayhopice skates ice skatingkickmovie (UK film) netpartyplayerpoolpractice practisepresentrideroller skatesroller skatingsailscoreskateskipsports centre (US center)swimswimming pooltexttowelvideowalkbackpack (UK rucksack)cartoonchannelchesscollectconcertdiarydrumfestivalflashlight (UK torch)golfhotelinstrumentinvitationjoin (a club)magazine match (football)meetmemberonlinepop musicprizeprogramme (US program)puzzlepyramidquizracerock musicrucksack (US backpack)scoreskisledgesnowballsnowboardsnowboardingsnowmanstage (theatre)suitcaseswingteamtenttorch (US flashlight)tunetyre (US tire)umbrellaviolinvolleyballwinnerPRE A1 STARTERSA1 MOVERSA2 FLYERSTimeafternoonbirthdayclockdayeveninginmorningnighttodaywatchyearafteralwaysbeforeeverynevero’clocksometimesweekweekendyesterdayThe days of the week:MondayTuesdayWednesdayThursdayFridaySaturdaySundaya.m. (for time)afteragoautumn (US fall)beforecalendarcenturydate (as in time)earlyendfall (UK autumn)futurehourhow longlatelatermiddaymidnightminutemonthp.m. (for time)pastquarterspringsummertimetomorrowtonightwinterThe months of the year:January FebruaryMarchAprilMayJuneJulyAugustSeptemberOctoberNovemberDecemberToysalienballballoonbaseballbasketballbikeboard gameboatcardollfootball (US soccer)gamehelicopterlorry (US truck)monstermotorbikeplanerobotsoccer (UK football)teddy (bear)toytraintruck (UK lorry)modelTransportbikeboatbuscardriveflygohelicopterlorry (US truck)motorbikeplaneriderunshipswimtraintruck (UK lorry)bus stationbus stopdrivedriverridestationtickettractortripambulancebicyclefire engine (US fire truck)journey lift (ride)motorwaypassengerplatformracing (car; bike)railwayrocketspaceshiptaxitourtrafficwheelWeathersuncloudcloudyicerainrainbowskysnowsunnyweatherwindwindyfogfoggystormPRE A1 STARTERSA1 MOVERSA2 FLYERSWorkteachercircusclowncookdentistdoctordriverfarmerfilm (US movie) starhospitalnursepiratepop star workactorairportambulanceartistastronautbusinessbusinessman/womandesignerengineerfactoryfire engine (US fire truck)fire fighterjobjournalist managermechanicmeetingnewsnewspaper officephotographerpilotpolice officerpolice stationqueenrocketsingertaxiwaiterThe world around usbeachsandseashellstreetsuntreewaterbuildingcitycountrycountrysidefieldforestgrassgroundislandlakeleaf/leavesmoonmountainplantriverroadrockskystartownvillagewaterfallwaveworldairbridgecastlecavedesertEarthentranceenvironmentexitfirefuturehilllandocean planet pondspacestonestreamviewwoodSpeaking assessmentExaminers and markingThe quality assurance of Speaking Examiners (SEs) is managed by Team Leaders (TLs). TLs ensure all examiners successfully complete examiner training and regular certification of procedure and assessment before they examine. TLs are in turn responsible to a Professional Support Leader (PSL) who is the professional representative of Cambridge English for the Speaking tests in a given country or region.Annual examiner certification involves attendance at a face-to-face meeting to focus on and discuss assessment and procedure, followed by the marking of sample Speaking tests in an online environment. Examiners must complete standardisation of assessment for all relevant levels each year and are regularly monitored during live testing sessions.Assessment scalesThroughout the test the candidate is assessed by one examiner using the assessment criteria. The assessment for all levels is based on three criteria, each with a six-point scale (0 to 5) which is defined in terms of candidate behaviour. The scale descriptors are reproduced for Pre A1 Starters, A1 Movers and A2 Flyers below.Pre A1 StartersVOCABULARYPRONUNCIATIONINTERACTIONRangeControlExtentIndividual soundsWord stressReception/RespondingSupport requiredFluency/Promptness5Uses the vocabulary required to deal with all test tasks.Produces simple utterances but makes occasional mistakes.Generally responds at word or phrase level but may also produce some longer utterances.Generally intelligible, although some sounds may be unclear.Has limited control of word stress.Generally responds appropriately to instructions, questions and visual prompts, although some support may be required.Is able to ask for support if required.Often responds promptly, although there may be hesitation.4Some features of 3.0 and some features of 5.0 in approximately equal measure.3Uses the vocabulary required to deal with most test tasks.Attempts a few simple utterances but makes some basic mistakes which may obscure meaning.Generally responds at word level but may also produce phrases.Sometimes intelligible.Responds to instructions, questions and visual prompts, although frequent support may be required.May attempt to ask for support if required.There is hesitation and responses may be delayed or halting.2Some features of 3.0 and some features of 1.0 in approximately equal measure.1Has the vocabulary required to attempt some test tasks.May attempt a few simple utterances but basic mistakes and lack of language prevent communication.Responds only at single word level, or does not respond.Attempts to produce the sounds of the language but is often difficult to understand.Requires support throughout and often may not respond to instructions, questions and visual prompts.Hesitation requires a great deal of patience of a listener.0Performance does not satisfy the Band 1 descriptor.A1 MoversVOCABULARY AND GRAMMARPRONUNCIATIONINTERACTIONRangeControlExtentCohesionIndividual soundsStressIntonationReception/RespondingSupport requiredFluency/Promptness5Uses the vocabulary required to deal with all test tasks.Uses some simple structures correctly but makes some mistakes, although meaning is generally clear.Responds at word, phrase or longer utterance level.Can join ideas with some simple linkers (e.g. and, but, then, when).Is mostly intelligible.Has limited control of word stress and intonation.Responds appropriately to instructions, questions and visual prompts, and very little support is required.Is able to ask for support if required.Almost always responds promptly, although there may be hesitation and some pausing mid-utterance.4Some features of 3.0 and some features of 5.0 in approximately equal measure.3Uses the vocabulary required to deal with most test tasks.Produces some simple structures but makes some basic mistakes which may obscure meaning.Generally responds at word or phrase level but may also produce some longer utterances.Can join ideas with a few simple linkers (e.g. and).Is mostly intelligible, although some sounds may be unclear.Has limited control of word stress.Responds appropriately to instructions, questions and visual prompts, although some support is required.Is able to ask for support if required.Often responds promptly, although there may be hesitation and pausing mid-utterance.2Some features of 3.0 and some features of 1.0 in approximately equal measure.1Uses the vocabulary required to attempt some test tasks.Attempts a few simple utterances but makes some basic mistakes which may obscure meaning.Generally responds at word level but may also produce phrases.Can join words with simple linkers (e.g. and).Sometimes may be difficult to understand.Responds appropriately to some instructions, questions and visual prompts, although frequent support may be required.May attempt to ask for support if required.There is hesitation and pausing mid-utterance; responses may be delayed or halting.0Performance does not satisfy the Band 1 descriptor.Pronunciation: If the candidate produces some language, but insufficient language to make a confident judgement about pronunciation (e.g. just a couple of words), the maximum score that can be awarded is 3, regardless of quality of pronunciation.A2 FlyersVOCABULARY AND GRAMMARPRONUNCIATIONINTERACTIONRangeControlExtentCohesionIndividual soundsStressIntonationReception/RespondingSupport requiredFluency/Promptness5Uses a range of vocabulary to deal with all test tasks.Uses a range of simple structures and, although there are some mistakes, meaning is clear.Responds at word, phrase or longer utterance level.Can join ideas with a range of simple linkers (e.g. and, but, when, then, because).Is mostly intelligible.Has some control of stress and intonation at both word and longer utterance levels.Responds appropriately to all instructions, questions and visual prompts, and very little support is required.Is able to ask for support if required.Responds promptly with only natural hesitation and pausing.4Some features of 3.0 and some features of 5.0 in approximately equal measure.3Uses the vocabulary required to deal with most test tasks.Uses some simple structures correctly but makes some mistakes, although meaning is generally clear.Responds at word, phrase or longer utterance level.Can join ideas with some simple linkers (e.g. and, but, when, then).Is mostly intelligible.Has limited control of word stress and intonation.Responds appropriately to almost all instructions, questions and visual prompts, and little support is required.Is able to ask for support if required.Almost always responds promptly, although there may be hesitation and some pausing mid-utterance.2Some features of 3.0 and some features of 1.0 in approximately equal measure.1Uses the vocabulary required to deal with some test tasks.Attempts some simple structures but makes some basic mistakes which may obscure meaning.Generally responds at word or phrase level but may also produce longer utterances.Can join ideas with a few simple linkers (e.g. and).Is mostly intelligible, although some sounds may be unclear.Has limited control of word stress.Responds appropriately to some instructions, questions and visual prompts with some support.May attempt to ask for support if required.Often responds promptly, although there may be hesitation and pausing mid-utterance.0Performance does not satisfy the Band 1 descriptor.Pronunciation: If the candidate produces some language, but insufficient language to make a confident judgement about pronunciation (e.g. just a couple of words), the maximum score that can be awarded is 3, regardless of quality of pronunciation. Glossary of Speaking Scales terms1. Vocabulary and grammarRangerefers to the degree to which candidates have the vocabulary to deal with the test tasks. As candidates progress from Pre A1 Starters to A2 Flyers they will make increasing use of a greater variety of words and grammatical forms.Controlrefers to the degree to which candidates can (attempt to) use the simple structures which are in the syllabus for the three levels. Complete accuracy, even to score a 5 at A2 Flyers, is not expected, but how far errors may or may not obscure meaning is considered.Extentrefers to the length of a candidate’s utterances. This ranges from mostly one-word responses at Pre A1 Starters, extending to short, simple sentences at A1 Movers, and slightly longer and slightly more complex sentence responses at the upper A2 Flyers level.Cohesionrefers to a candidate’s ability to join ideas using simple linkers: starting with and at A1 Movers, and rising to, for example, then and because at A2 Flyers.2. PronunciationIndividual soundsrefers to the candidate’s ability to pronounce vowels, diphthongs and consonants. Generally, the candidate should be intelligible to non-EFL/ESOL specialists even if the candidate has a strong or unfamiliar accent.Stress refers to the emphasis laid on a syllable or word. The limited sample of language required at Pre A1 Starters means that candidates only have a few opportunities to demonstrate control of a limited number of phonological features. For this reason, the Pre A1 Starters pronunciation descriptors only refer to intelligibility, although word stress is included as an aspect of this.Intonationrefers to the way the voice rises and falls to convey the candidate’s mood, or to support meaning. The aim is to give examiners an indication of the type of phonological features expected. In particular, some A2 Flyers tasks require candidates to ask questions, which is why a reference to question intonation in the 3.0 and 5.0 descriptors is included in the scales. A1 Movers 5.0 descriptors also include intonation, as candidates will be beginning to make use of this feature at this stage. 3. InteractionReception/Respondingrefers to replying or reacting to what the examiner has said. The reception and responding scale is designed to assess the candidate’s ability to understand the examiner and to respond appropriately.Support requiredrefers to the degree of support from the examiner needed by the candidate at each level and for each band. Fluency/Promptnessrefers to aspects of interaction which are relevant and appropriate to the task, ranging between overall fluidity of expression and generally unable to sustain speech. The scales account for the fact that typical performances at all three levels are characterised by hesitation and pauses.AdvertCambridge English Qualifications.Your path to learning English, step by step.This document was initially designed for print and as such does not reach accessibility standard WCAG 2.1 in a number of ways including missing text alternatives and missing document structure.If you need this document in a different format contact BrandAdmin.C@cambridgeenglish.org telling us your name, email address and requirements and we will respond within 15 working days.© 2024 Cambridge University Press & Assessment ENG/V1/AUG24/YLE-HANDBOOKAll details are correct at the time of going to print.We believe that English can unlock a lifetime of experiences and, together with teachers and our partners, we help people to learn and confidently prove their skills to the world.cambridge.org/englishCambridge University Press & Assessment Logo